---
aliases:
  - Studying Mis-strategies
  - Studying Misstrategies
tags:
  - by/self
  - date/2023/11/01
  - functional/texts
---

# Studying Mis-strategies

Are you a student that always studies hard, but never gets good results? Or a desperate teacher wanting to help students falling behind, but it never works well? Most pupils and instructors accept that working hard relates to academic performance. This quantitative view is attractive to us for its simplicity, but it ignores the important qualitative side of studying. Disregarding the quality of studying leads to the situation at the start — certain students always failing to catch up despite working hard and instructors always failing to help them. If we do not want the above to continue, both students and teachers have to start caring about quality study. The best way to learn about quality study skills is by looking in the opposite way — ineffective ways to study. To get started, I will be looking at part of the problem — poor study strategies.

Reliable evidence suggests that students generally adopt passive study strategies that are ineffective. Study strategies are familiar to both students and teachers. But we rarely care about how they work, leading to students adopting poor study strategies. Thus, it is helpful to know what types of study strategies there are, so that we can label them as good or bad. Unfortunately, there are many types of study strategies identified in the literature. For example, five strategies were identified in a study of college pupils. They are rereading, highlighting, notetaking, outlining, and flashcards (Miyatsu, Nguyen, & McDaniel, 2018). This influential study has been shared by many netizens, showing that many agrees with the classification. Yet, another highly-cited study by a cross-disciplinary team of researchers identified twelve study strategies. They are more specific than those in the former study. Examples inlude "completed old exams" and "reviewed online outside content" (Walck-Shannon, Rowell, & Frey, 2021). This significant difference between these two influential studies poses a problem for us — how do we make sure our classification is specific enough? The latter study differs from the former by also classifying the study strategies as active, passive, and mixed. This suffices for our purpose of determining effectiveness of study strategies. The authors of the same study summarized previous literature and concluded that active study strategies are more effective than passive ones. It also shows that pupils spent half of their study time on ineffective passive strategies (Walck-Shannon, Rowell, & Frey, 2021). This unfortunate state of affair can explain why some students failing to thrive despite working hard. Students and teachers looking to improve their strategies should consider adopting active strategies. In particular, the three popular strategies notetaking, outlining, and flashcards are active ones.

But, using active strategies without regards to their implementation could still lead to suboptimal studying habits. Even ineffective ones can be improved with better implementation. The influential study on popular strategies above summarized effective and ineffective implementations of both active and passive strategies. It offers a balanced perspective of study habits. For instance, recalling many times and spacing improve flashcards' effectiveness. Dropping flashcards by students on their own is detrimental to learning (Miyatsu, Nguyen, & McDaniel, 2018). In cases where the student can hardly change their ineffective strategies, effective implementations of those strategies explored in the study can help mitigate this shortcoming. Thus, instructors should guide pupils towards effective and away from ineffective implementations. This might be easier than changing their study habits outright.

While instructors can guide the pupils, keep in mind instructors are not perfect. Like pupils, they can have misconceptions on study habits. A study published on the reputable journal _Memory_ found that teachers have only marginally better knowledge of study strategies than students. In particular, they are only slightly more likely to recommend effective habits over ineffective ones when asked to compare two scenarios (Morehead, Rhodes, & DeLozier, 2016). The study's use of prior studies to confirm its results adds to its validity. Furthermore, as outlined by an article published on the professional organization American Psychological Association (APA), instructors do not spend much time on teaching study skills but prefers teaching "study tips". Thus, the knowledge of teachers fails to transfer to students. The article explains this clearly with common tips like "Get plenty of sleep" and "Listening to Baroque music improves memory". They are respectively examples of a vague tip and an empirically unsupported tip (Chew, 2020). Both sources underscore teachers failing to influence students to adopt better study habits. How could students adopt active study habits if the teachers do not know either? Instructors should consider relearning study strategies from definitive sources in the literature. They should place more emphasis on study strategies in their curriculum. Use authoritative materials like the teaching module linked in the APA article.

To summarize, both instructors and students have insufficient knowledge about study strategies. This leads to ineffective study habits. Hard work on students' part can only mitigate so much. People have been researching study skills since the last century. Yet, the research has failed to penetrate the public consciousness even in this 21st century world. Thus, both teachers and pupils should learn to read empirical research. Only in this way can we escape the trap of ineffective studying.

## References

- Chew, S. L. (2020, May 27). _Teaching study skills (not just study tips) in introductory psychology._ https://www.apa.org/ed/precollege/psychology-teacher-network/introductory-psychology/study-skills
- Miyatsu, T., Nguyen, K., & McDaniel, M. A. (2018). Five Popular Study Strategies: Their Pitfalls and Optimal Implementations. _Perspectives on Psychological Science_, _13_(3), 390-407. https://doi.org/10.1177/1745691617710510
- Morehead, K., Rhodes, M. G., & DeLozier, S. (2016). Instructor and student knowledge of study strategies. _Memory_, _24_(2), 257-271. https://doi.org/10.1080/09658211.2014.1001992
- Walck-Shannon, E. M., Rowell, S. F., & Frey, R. F. (2021). To what extent do study habits relate to performance?. _CBE—Life Sciences Education_, _20_(1), ar6. https://doi.org/10.1187/cbe.20-05-0091
