---
aliases:
  - COMP 2711H question on 2024-09-09 lecture
  - COMP 2711H questions on 2024-09-09 lecture
  - COMP2711H question on 2024-09-09 lecture
  - COMP2711H questions on 2024-09-09 lecture
  - HKUST COMP 2711H question on 2024-09-09 lecture
  - HKUST COMP 2711H questions on 2024-09-09 lecture
  - HKUST COMP2711H question on 2024-09-09 lecture
  - HKUST COMP2711H questions on 2024-09-09 lecture
tags:
  - flashcard/active/special/academia/HKUST/COMP_2711H/questions/2024-09-09/lecture
  - language/in/English
---

# questions on 2024-09-09 lecture

- HKUST COMP 2711H

## well-ordering principle to infinite descent with an additional assumption

Prove {@{infinite descent from the well-ordering principle, with the additional assumption: the [trichotomy](law%20of%20trichotomy.md) axiom, which states $n \le m \equiv \lnot(m < n)$}@}. <!--SR:!2028-01-06,888,330-->

- the additional assumption ::@:: The additional assumption is required for the well-ordering principle to imply infinite descent. In fact, the well-ordering principle is not equivalent to infinite descent (under the other Peano axioms). This common mistake is due to proofs assuming that if $n \le m$ then $\lnot(m < n)$, but this is not implied by the other Peano axioms except for the induction axiom, the thing that we are trying to prove. An example of this failing is the existence of a circular successor chain that satisfies all other Peano axioms. <!--SR:!2028-05-09,936,330!2029-05-14,1304,350-->
- strategy ::@:: Prove by contradiction. Assume infinite descent fails by assuming there is an infinite sequence of strictly decreasing natural numbers, but the well-ordering principle holds. Note that the additional assumption is required. <!--SR:!2026-08-24,517,330!2026-09-11,532,330-->
- note <!-- flashcard ID: a269c9d6-03a7-4078-bf84-f77eff89f94f -->::@:: Induction and infinite descent are logically equivalent, so it is possible to prove one from the other. However, the well-ordering principle is implied by induction or infinite descent, but not the reverse, so is not equivalent (under the other Peano axioms). <!--SR:!2027-12-28,879,330!2029-05-07,1297,350-->

1. assumption ::@:: Assume the well-ordering principle holds but not infinite descent. <!--SR:!2029-04-19,1283,350!2029-04-13,1278,350-->
2. construction ::@:: Let $a_1, a_2, \ldots$ be an infinite sequence of strictly decreasing natural numbers. Let $A$ be the set of natural numbers in the infinite sequence (which is nonempty). By the well-ordering principle, there is an least element $a_i$, which is also in the infinite sequence. Now consider the element $a_{i + 1}$. <!--SR:!2028-05-14,939,330!2027-12-24,875,330-->
3. conclusion ::@:: Now consider the element $a_{i + 1}$. Since $a_i$ is the least element of $A$ and $a_{i + 1}$ is in $A$, so $a_i \le a_{i + 1}$. By the trichotomy axiom (the additional assumption), this implies $a_{i + 1} < a_i$ is false. This means the sequence is not strictly decreasing from $a_i$ to $a_{i + 1}$. This is a contradiction. So the original assumption that infinite descent does not hold is false, so infinite descent holds if the well-ordering principle and the additional assumption hold. <!--SR:!2027-11-02,734,290!2028-10-14,1067,310-->

## induction to well-ordering principle

Prove {@{the well-ordering principle from induction}@}. <!--SR:!2029-03-05,1246,350-->

- strategy ::@:: Prove by contradiction. Assume induction holds, but the well-ordering principle fails by assuming there is an _nonempty_ set of natural numbers without a least element. <!--SR:!2026-08-25,518,330!2029-04-01,1268,350-->
- note <!-- flashcard ID: 6ba8c155-6f06-42cc-a831-59c4fa17a01f -->::@:: Induction and infinite descent are logically equivalent, so it is possible to prove one from the other. However, the well-ordering principle is implied by induction or infinite descent, but not the reverse, so is not equivalent (under the other Peano axioms). <!--SR:!2026-03-23,364,310!2029-04-02,1269,350-->

1. assumption ::@:: Assume induction holds but the well-ordering principle. Let $A$ be a _nonempty_ set of natural numbers without a least element. <!--SR:!2029-03-24,1261,350!2026-09-03,525,330-->
2. construction ::@:: Consider the predicate $$P(n) := n \notin A \,,$$ which states the natural number $n$ is not in $A$. We can prove the above predicate holds for all $n \in \mathbb N_0$ by (strong) induction. <!--SR:!2026-09-02,524,330!2026-09-01,524,330-->
3. base case ::@:: Consider $P(0)$. $0$ is the least element of all natural numbers (implied by induction), so if $0$ is in $A$, then it would be the least element of $A$. So $0$ must not be in $A$, hence $P(0)$ is true. <!--SR:!2029-03-18,1256,350!2029-03-23,1260,350-->
4. induction ::@:: Assume $P(m')$ holds if $m'$ is not larger than some natural number $m \in \mathbb N_0$, i.e. $(\forall m' \le m)(P(m'))$ is true. (This is the induction hypothesis of strong induction as opposed to ordinary induction.) Consider $P(S(m))$, which says $S(m) \notin A$. Consider if $S(m)$ is in $A$. Since all natural numbers less than or equal to $m$ are not in $A$ by the induction hypothesis, $S(m)$ would be the least element of $A$. So $S(m)$ must not be in $A$, hence $P(S(m))$ is true. <!--SR:!2026-03-24,365,310!2029-04-05,1271,350-->
5. conclusion ::@:: By (strong) induction, we have proved that every natural number is not in $A$. So $A$ is _empty_. This contradicts that $A$ is _nonempty_. By contradiction, a _nonempty_ set of natural numbers without a least element does not exist, i.e., the well-ordering principle holds. <!--SR:!2026-08-19,513,330!2029-03-10,1250,350-->

## Fibonacci number problems

{@{The Fibonacci numbers}@} are defined by: {@{$$F_n = \begin{cases} 0, & n = 0 \\ 1, & n = 1 \\ F_{n - 1} + F_{n - 2} & n \ge 2 \end{cases} \,.$$}@} <!--SR:!2029-03-11,1250,350!2026-04-06,121,399-->

- strategy ::@:: Apply induction on the structure of the Fibonacci numbers. The well-ordering principle may also be used. Sometimes, you can prove easily a new theorem from a proved theorem without using induction. <!--SR:!2029-04-25,1288,350!2025-12-21,296,290-->

1. Prove the sum of Fibonacci numbers: $$\forall n \in \mathbb N_0 \qquad \sum_{i = 0}^n F_i = F_{n + 2} - 1$$ ::@:: Apply induction. <!--SR:!2029-04-22,1285,350!2029-04-30,1291,350-->
2. Prove the sum of odd Fibonacci numbers: $$\forall n \in \mathbb N_0 \qquad \sum_{i = 1}^n F_{2i - 1} = F_{2n}$$ ::@:: Apply induction. Or prove using the sum of even Fibonacci numbers (3) (but remember to avoid circular reasoning). <!--SR:!2028-09-04,1035,310!2029-03-22,1259,350-->
3. Prove the sum of even Fibonacci numbers: $$\forall n \in \mathbb N_0 \qquad \sum_{i = 0}^n F_{2i} = F_{2n + 1} - 1$$ ::@:: Apply induction. Or prove using the sum of odd Fibonacci numbers (2) (but remember to avoid circular reasoning). <!--SR:!2026-12-18,562,310!2029-03-06,1247,350-->
4. Prove that consecutive Fibonacci numbers are relatively prime: $$\forall n \in \mathbb N_0 \qquad \gcd(F_n, F_{n + 1}) = 1$$ ::@:: Apply induction or the well-ordering principle. <!--SR:!2029-04-09,1274,350!2029-03-04,1245,350-->

## sum of sequence of cubes

Prove {@{the sum of sequence of cubes}@}: {@{$$\forall n \in \mathbb N_0 \qquad \sum_{i = 0}^n i^3 = \left(\sum_{i = 0}^n i \right)^2 = \frac {n^2 (n + 1)^2} 4 \,.$$}@} <!--SR:!2028-02-01,815,290!2026-04-13,127,399-->

- strategy ::@:: Apply induction. <!--SR:!2029-05-08,1299,350!2027-09-27,819,330-->

## subset problems

A set $A$ is a subset of $B$ iff {@{every element of $A$ is in $B$}@}. In particular, {@{the empty set $\varnothing$ and the set $B$ itself}@} are {@{both subsets of $B$}@}. <!--SR:!2028-04-19,921,330!2026-03-03,119,390!2026-03-04,120,390-->

- strategy ::@:: Apply induction. For the induction set, consider the effect of adding a new element. <!--SR:!2029-03-17,1255,350!2029-05-01,1292,350-->

1. Prove a finite set of size $n$ has $2^n$ subsets. ::@:: Apply induction. For the induction step, consider NOT adding the new element to each of the subsets and adding the new element to each of the subsets. <!--SR:!2028-01-02,884,330!2029-05-03,1295,350-->
2. Prove a finite set of size $n \ge 1$ has $2^{n - 1}$ even subsets (subsets with even number of elements) and $2^{n - 1}$ odd subsets (subsets with odd number of elements). ::@:: Apply induction. For the induction step, consider NOT adding the new element to each of the odd and even subsets, and adding the new element to each of the odd and even subsets. <!--SR:!2029-04-20,1284,350!2029-04-26,1288,350-->
3. We have a set of $n$ students $C$. How many ways can we choose $A^+ \subseteq A \subseteq C$? ::@:: There are $3^n$ ways of choosing. We can prove this using induction. For the induction step, consider the new student can have 3 possibilities: only in $C$, only in $A \subseteq C$, or in $A^+ \subseteq A \subseteq C$. <!--SR:!2029-04-15,1280,350!2029-04-21,1285,350-->

## Nim

Nim is {@{a mathematical game of strategy in which two players take turns removing \(or "nimming"\) objects from distinct heaps or piles}@}. Consider Nim with {@{two piles of $a$ objects and $b$ objects and two perfectly rational \(tries to not lose\) players}@}. Prove that if {@{$a = b$, then player 1 eventually cannot take any more objects and loses}@}; and if {@{$a \ne b$, then player 2 eventually cannot take any more objects and loses}@}. <!--SR:!2029-04-26,1289,350!2028-04-03,908,330!2029-03-12,1251,350!2026-02-27,117,387-->

- strategy ::@:: Apply (strong) induction. The induction is applied to the structure of Nim. The game state of Nim can be represented by a tuple of 2 numbers $(a, b)$. <!--SR:!2026-12-28,572,310!2029-04-06,1272,350-->

1. If $a = b$, then player 1 eventually cannot take any more objects and loses. ::@:: Base case: If $(a, b) = (0, 0)$, player 1 cannot take any more objects. Induction step: Prove that $(a, b) = (n + 1, n + 1)$ must lead to a game state of $(a, b) = (m, m)$ for some $m \le n$, and invoke the strong induction hypothesis. <!--SR:!2028-03-28,903,330!2029-04-04,1270,350-->
2. If $a \ne b$, then player 2 eventually cannot take any more objects and loses. ::@:: Reuse the result when $a = b$. Show that if $a \ne b$, then player 1 can always turn it into a game state where $(a, b) = (n, n)$. Then this is equivalent to the result when $a = b$, except that player 1 and player 2 has swapped places. So player 2 cannot take any more objects and loses instead. <!--SR:!2029-03-22,1260,350!2028-03-29,904,330-->
