---
aliases:
  - COMP 2711H question on 2024-10-07 tutorial
  - COMP 2711H questions on 2024-10-07 tutorial
  - COMP2711H question on 2024-10-07 tutorial
  - COMP2711H questions on 2024-10-07 tutorial
  - HKUST COMP 2711H question on 2024-10-07 tutorial
  - HKUST COMP 2711H questions on 2024-10-07 tutorial
  - HKUST COMP2711H question on 2024-10-07 tutorial
  - HKUST COMP2711H questions on 2024-10-07 tutorial
tags:
  - flashcard/active/special/academia/HKUST/COMP_2711H/questions/2024-10-07/tutorial
  - language/in/English
---

# questions on 2024-10-07 tutorial

- HKUST COMP 2711H

## longest path problem on a tree

Design an algorithm to {@{find the length (number of edges) of a longest path on a tree}@}. <!--SR:!2025-01-19,72,310-->

- strategy ::@:: Making the tree a rooted directed tree helps. Consider any path on the tree and the position of the root on the path. <!--SR:!2024-12-09,35,270!2025-01-19,72,310-->
- lemma ::@:: A longest path must start and end on a leaf vertex, passing through the root. <p> This is trivial to prove by the extremal principle. <!--SR:!2024-12-22,48,290!2025-01-19,72,310-->
- algorithm ::@:: Pick any _non-leaf_ vertex as the root on the tree and make it directed. <p> Assign a property called "depth" for every vertex. If a vertex has no direct children, then it has a depth of 0. Otherwise, it has a depth of the max depth of its direct children, then plus 1. <p> Next, assign another property called "longest path with said vertex as the _highest_ vertex" (_highest_ means closest to the root) for every vertex. If the vertex has exactly (zero or) one child, then said property is the root's depth. Otherwise, it is the maximum between the root's depth; and the sum of the depths of its two direct children with maximum depths, then plus 2. <p> Finally, the vertex with the highest "longest path with said vertex as the highest vertex" gives the length of a longest path on the tree. <p> Its correctness can be proven by considering a longest path on the tree, which must start and end on leaves. Also consider the position of its _highest_ vertex in the rooted tree. <!--SR:!2024-12-06,25,270!2024-12-27,44,250-->

## largest independent set on a tree

Design an algorithm to {@{find the size of a largest independent set on a tree}@}. <!--SR:!2025-01-19,72,310-->

- strategy ::@:: Making the tree a rooted directed tree helps. Realize that for a rooted tree, if we remove the root, the children becomes separate trees themselves. Then we can make the problem recursive. (Something something dynamic programming...) <!--SR:!2025-01-19,72,310!2025-01-19,72,310-->
- algorithm ::@:: Let _T_ be an arbitrary tree. Make it rooted at _v_ to obtain a rooted tree _T_<sub>_v_</sub>. Define two properties: $f(T_v)$, the largest independent set on the tree _T_<sub>_v_</sub> if _v_ is included in the largest independent set; and $g(T_v)$, the same thing as before but if _v_ is NOT included in the largest independent set. <p> We can define the number recursively. For a tree with 1 node, $f(T_v) = 1$ and $g(T_v) = 0$. Realizing that a rooted tree, without its root, becomes separate trees, we can define $f(T_v)$ as the sum of $g(t)$ of its direct children $t$ of the vertex _v_, then plus 1. We can define $g(T_v)$ as the sum of the maximum between $f(t)$ and $g(t)$ for each direct children _t_ of the vertex _v_. Finally, the answer is given by the maximum of $f(T)$ and $g(T)$ on the original tree. <!--SR:!2025-01-19,72,310!2025-02-13,83,290-->
