---
aliases:
  - COMP 2711H question on 2024-09-16 lecture
  - COMP 2711H questions on 2024-09-16 lecture
  - COMP2711H question on 2024-09-16 lecture
  - COMP2711H questions on 2024-09-16 lecture
  - HKUST COMP 2711H question on 2024-09-16 lecture
  - HKUST COMP 2711H questions on 2024-09-16 lecture
  - HKUST COMP2711H question on 2024-09-16 lecture
  - HKUST COMP2711H questions on 2024-09-16 lecture
tags:
  - flashcard/active/special/academia/HKUST/COMP_2711H/questions/2024-09-16/lecture
  - language/in/English
---

# questions on 2024-09-16 lecture

- HKUST COMP 2711H

## arrangement of _n_ people in a circle

How many ways are there to {@{arrange _n_ people in a circle}@}? <!--SR:!2025-05-28,166,310-->

- strategy ::@:: Consider arranging _n_ people in a straight line. Then consider joining the line of _n_ people into a circle. <!--SR:!2025-01-18,72,310!2025-01-17,71,310-->

<!-- list separator -->

- solution ::@:: There are _n_! ways to arrange _n_ people in a straight line. Join the line into a circle. Rotating the _n_ people by 0 ≤ _k_ < _n_ people along the circle counts as the same arrangement. There are _n_ such possible rotations. So there are _n_! / _n_ = (_n_ - 1)! ways to arrange _n_ people in a circle. <!--SR:!2025-10-28,287,330!2025-01-17,71,310-->

## arrangement of _n_ people in _r_ circles

How many ways are there to {@{arrange _n_ people in _r_ circles, where _n_, _r_ ≥ 1}@}? (A recurrence relation is accepted.) <!--SR:!2025-01-18,72,310-->

- strategy ::@:: Represent the answer to the above question using $s(n, r)$. First, if _r_ = 1, then this is equivalent to the previous problem, i.e. $s(n, 1) = (n - 1)!$ Another thing is to apply the method of distinguished element: select 1 person and consider their possibilities to yield a recurrence relation for $s(n, r)$. <!--SR:!2025-01-18,72,310!2025-10-30,289,330-->

<!-- list separator -->

- solution ::@:: First, $s(n, 1) = (n - 1)!$, as proven above. Next, consider $s(n, r)$, where n, r ≥ 1. Select a person from there. Either the person forms a circle alone (singleton) or is part of a circle with multiple people. In the first case, there are $s(n - 1, r - 1)$ such arrangements. In the second case, there are $s(n - 1, r)$ such arrangements, and then we multiply this by $n - 1$ since this is the number of ways to insert a person into _n - 1_ people in _r_ circles without creating a new circle. Finally, $$s(n, r) = s(n - 1, r - 1) + (n - 1) s(n - 1, r) \,.$$ <!--SR:!2025-07-22,209,310!2025-05-27,153,290-->
- closed expression
  - closed expression / setup ::@:: We can yield a closed expression for the above recurrence relation using generating functions. First, for convenience, rewrite the above recurrence relations as $$\begin{aligned} s(0, 0) & = 1 \\ s(0, r) & = 0 \\ s(n, 0) & = 0 \\ s(n, r) & = s(n - 1, r- 1) + (n - 1) s(n - 1, r) \,. \end{aligned}$$ This is equivalent to the above solution, except that _n_ and _r_ are allowed to be 0. Also note that this correctly yields $s(n, r) = 0$ whenever _n_ < _r_. <!--SR:!2025-01-18,72,310!2025-01-18,72,310-->
  - closed expression / derivation ::@:: Now consider a multivariate generating function: $$S(x, y) = \sum_{n, r = 0}^\infty s(n, r) \frac {x^n} {n!} y^r \,.$$ The above recurrence relation $$\begin{aligned} s(n, r) = s(n - 1, r - 1) + (n - 1)s(n - 1, r) \\ s(n + 1, r) = s(n, r - 1) + n s(n, r) \end{aligned}$$ suggests the following partial differential equation: $$\begin{aligned} D_x[S(x, y)] & = y S(x, y) + x D_x[S(x, y)] \\ (1 - x)D_x[S(x, y)] & = yS(x, y) \,. \end{aligned}$$ <p> Fix an arbitrary $y \in \mathbb R$ to get an ordinary differential equation for each value of $y$: $$\begin{aligned} (1 - x) S_y'(x) & = y S_y(x) \,. \end{aligned}$$ Solve the ordinary differential equation (unrigorously): $$\begin{aligned} (1 - x)S_y'(x) & = y S_y(x) \\ (1 - x) \frac {\mathrm d S_y} {\mathrm dx} & = y S_y \\ \frac 1 {S_y} \,\mathrm d S_y & = \frac y {1 - x} \,\mathrm{d}x \\ \ln \lvert S_y \rvert & = -y \ln \lvert 1 - x \rvert + C \\ \lvert S_y \rvert & = e^{-y \ln \lvert 1 - x \rvert + C} \\ & = C \lvert 1 - x \rvert^{-y} \\ S_y & = C \lvert 1 - x \rvert^{-y} \\ \\ S(x, y) & = C \lvert 1 - x \rvert^{-y} \\ & = \lvert 1 - x \rvert^{-y} && S(0, 0) = 1 \,. \end{aligned}$$ <p> We can ignore the absolute sign because we only care about the coefficients. The solution has the power series expansion: $$\begin{aligned} S(x, y) & = (1 - x)^{-y} \\ & = \sum_{n = 0}^\infty \binom {n + y - 1} {y - 1} x^n \\ & = \sum_{n = 0}^\infty \frac {(n + y - 1)!} {n! (y - 1)!} x^n \\ & = \sum_{n = 0}^\infty \frac {x^n} {n!} y^{\overline n} && \text{rising factorial} \\ & = \sum_{n = 0}^\infty \frac {x^n} {n!} \sum_{r = 0}^n \begin{bmatrix} n \\ r \end{bmatrix} y^r \\ & = \sum_{n = 0}^\infty \sum_{r = 0}^n \frac {x^n} {n!} y^r \begin{bmatrix} n \\ r \end{bmatrix} \\ & = \sum_{n, r = 0}^\infty \frac {x^n} {n!} y^r \begin{bmatrix} n \\ r \end{bmatrix} \,. \end{aligned}$$ We can extract the closed expression for $s(n, r)$: $$\begin{aligned} s(n, r) & = \begin{bmatrix} n \\ r \end{bmatrix} \,. \end{aligned}$$ <p> This is exactly the (unsigned) Stirling numbers of the first kind, which is defined as the number of permutations of _n_ elements with _r_ disjoint cycles! <p> (Note: If you let the generating function indeterminate be $x^n y^r$ instead of $\frac {x^n} {n!} y^r$, you will have a much more difficult time. So it is important to choose the right type of generating functions! See the HTML comment on this line.) <!-- Now consider a multivariate generating function: $$S(x, y) = \sum_{n, r = 0}^\infty s(n, r) x^n y^r \,.$$ The above recurrence relation $$s(n, r) = s(n - 1, r - 1) + (n - 1)s(n - 1, r)$$ and the base cases, most importantly $s(0, 0) = 1$, suggest the following partial differential equation: $$S(x, y) = xy S(x, y) + x^2 D_x[S(x, y)] + 1 \,.$$ <p> Fix an arbitrary $y \in \mathbb R$ to get an ordinary differential equation for each value of $y$: $$\begin{aligned} S_y(x) & = xyS_y(x) + x^2 S_y'(x) + 1 \\ -1 & = (xy - 1) S_y(x) + x^2 S_y'(x) \,. \end{aligned}$$ Solve the ordinary differential equation (unrigorously): $$\begin{aligned} 0 & = (xy - 1) \tilde S_y(x) + x^2 \tilde S_y'(x) && \text{solve homogeneous} \\ 0 & = (xy - 1) \tilde S_y + x^2 \frac {\mathrm d \tilde S_y} {\mathrm dx} \\ 0 & = (xy - 1) \tilde S_y \, \mathrm dx + x^2 \, \mathrm d \tilde S_y \\ 0 & = \frac {xy - 1} {x^2} \, \mathrm dx + \frac 1 {\tilde S_y} \, \mathrm d S_y \\ \frac 1 {\tilde S_y} \, \mathrm d \tilde S_y & = \frac {1 - xy} {x^2} \, \mathrm dx \\ \ln \lvert \tilde S_y \rvert & = -\frac 1 x - y \ln \left\lvert x \right\rvert + C \\ \lvert \tilde S_y \rvert & = e^{-\frac 1 x - y \ln \lvert x \rvert + C} \\ \tilde S_y & = C e^{-\frac 1 x} \lvert x \rvert^{-y} \\ \\ S_y & = \int \! \frac {\det \begin{bmatrix} \frac 1 {x^2} \end{bmatrix} } {\det \begin{bmatrix} e^{-\frac 1 x} \lvert x \rvert^{-y} \end{bmatrix} } \,\mathrm{d}x && \text{variation of parameters} \\ & = \int \! e^{\frac 1 x} \lvert x \rvert^{y - 2} \, \mathrm{d}x \\ & = -\int \! e^x \left\lvert x^{-1} \right\rvert^y \,\mathrm{d}x && \frac 1 x \mapsto x \\ & = -\int \! e^x \lvert x \rvert^{-y} \,\mathrm{d}x \\ & = \int \! e^{-x} \lvert x \rvert^{-y} \,\mathrm{d}x && -x \mapsto x \\ & = \frac x {\lvert x \rvert} \int \! e^{-x} x^{-y} \,\mathrm{d}x \\ & = \frac x {\lvert x \rvert} \gamma(1 - y, x) + C && \text{lower incomplete gamma function} \\ \\ S(x, y) & = \frac x {\lvert x \rvert} \gamma(1 - y, x) + C \\ & = \frac x {\lvert x \rvert} \gamma(1 - y, x) + 1 && S(0, 0) = 1 \,. \end{aligned}$$ <p> The solution has the power series expansion... actually I have no idea. :( --> <!--SR:!2025-05-26,152,290!2025-01-18,72,310-->

## arrangement of _n_ people in a circle with forbidden positions

How many ways are there to {@{arrange _n_ ≥ 2 people in a circle if person 1 and 2 cannot be next to each other}@}? <!--SR:!2025-07-28,215,310-->

- strategy ::@:: Use the exclusion principle. Treat person 1 and 2 as 1 person. Beware of the case _n_ = 2. <!--SR:!2025-01-21,75,328!2025-09-04,246,328-->

<!-- list separator -->

- solution ::@:: There are (_n_ - 1)! arrangements of _n_ people in a circle. <p> Now, we find the number of arrangements with person 1 and 2 next to each other to exclude them. Treat person 1 and 2 as 1 person. Note that there are 2 ways to treat them as 1 person: person 1 is on the left or right of person 2. Then there are 2 ⋅ (_n_ - 2)! arrangements with person 1 and 2 next to each other. <p> However, when _n_ = 2, there is only 1 way to treat them as 1 person without double counting. So we need to special case _n_ = 2, which has 0 arrangements trivially. <p> So the final answer is: $$\begin{cases} 0, & n = 2 \\ (n - 1)! - 2 \cdot (n - 2)! = (n - 3) \cdot (n - 2)!, & n \ge 3 \,. \end{cases}$$ <!--SR:!2025-05-28,154,290!2025-01-18,72,310-->

## arrangement of _n_ people in _r_ circles with forbidden positions (with summation)

How many ways are there to {@{arrange _n_ people in _r_ circles if person 1 and 2 cannot be next to each other, where _n_ ≥ 2 and _r_ ≥ 1}@}? ($s(n, r)$ from previous questions may be used. The solution uses summation.) <!--SR:!2025-01-18,72,310-->

- strategy ::@:: Use the exclusion principle. Treat person 1 and 2 as 1 person. Beware of the case of person 1 and 2 in a circle by themselves. <!--SR:!2025-01-22,76,329!2025-09-03,245,329-->

<!-- list separator -->

- solution ::@:: There are $s(n, r)$ ways to arrange _n_ people in _r_ circles. <p> Now, we find the number of arrangements with person 1 and 2 next to each other to exclude them. there are two cases to consider: person 1 and 2 do not share a circle with others; and person 1 and 2 share a circle with others. The first case yields $$s(n - 2, r - 1) = \begin{bmatrix} n - 2 \\ r - 1 \end{bmatrix}$$ arrangements. The second case yields $$2 \cdot \sum_{i = 1}^{n - 2} \binom {n - 2} i \cdot i! \cdot s(n - 2 - i, r - 1) = 2 \cdot \sum_{i = 1}^{n - 2} P(n - 2, i) \cdot s(n - 2 - i, r - 1) \,,$$ where $i$ corresponds to having $1 \le i \le n - 2$ other people ($1 \le i \le n - 1 - r$ would also work) in the same circle as person 1 and 2. However, the equation for the second case can actually be simplified: $$\begin{aligned} & \phantom = 2 \cdot \sum_{i = 1}^{n - 2} P(n - 2, i) \cdot s(n - 2 - i, r - 1) \\ & = 2 \cdot \sum_{i = 1}^{n - 2} \frac {(n - 2)!} {(n - 2 - i)!} \begin{bmatrix} n - 2 - i \\ r - 1 \\ \end{bmatrix} \\ & = 2 \cdot \sum_{i = 0}^{n - 2} \frac {(n - 2)!} {(n - 2 - i)!} \begin{bmatrix} n - 2 - i \\ r - 1 \\ \end{bmatrix} - 2 \begin{bmatrix} n - 2 \\ r - 1 \end{bmatrix} \\ & = 2 \cdot \sum_{i = 0}^{n - 2} \frac {(n - 2)!} {i!} \begin{bmatrix} i \\ r - 1 \end{bmatrix} - 2 \begin{bmatrix} n - 2 \\ r - 1 \end{bmatrix} && i \mapsto n - 2 - i \\ & = 2 \cdot \sum_{i = r - 1}^{n - 2} \frac {(n - 2)!} {i!} \begin{bmatrix} i \\ r - 1 \end{bmatrix} - 2 \begin{bmatrix} n - 2 \\ r - 1 \end{bmatrix} && \forall i < r - 1 \quad \begin{bmatrix} i \\ r - 1 \end{bmatrix} = 0 \\ & = 2 \begin{bmatrix} n - 1 \\ r \end{bmatrix} - 2 \begin{bmatrix} n - 2 \\ r - 1 \end{bmatrix} && \text{a Stirling number identity} \\ & = 2 s(n - 1, r) - 2 s(n - 2, r - 1) \,. \end{aligned}$$ Indeed, the Stirling number identity used above can also be interpreted combinatorially. (Hint: Use induction again.) <p> Therefore the final answer is: $$\begin{aligned} \tilde s(n, r) & = s(n, r) - s(n - 2, r - 1) - (2s(n - 1, r) - 2s(n - 2, r - 1)) \\ & = s(n, r) - 2s(n - 1, r) + s(n - 2, r - 1) \,. \end{aligned}$$ <!--SR:!2025-05-05,123,250!2025-05-25,151,290-->

## pairing elements

How many ways are there to {@{pair 2<!-- markdown separator -->_n_ distinct elements}@}? A way to pair means that {@{every element is paired to another element}@}. <!--SR:!2025-01-18,72,310!2025-10-31,290,330-->

- strategy ::@:: There are many ways to consider this. The easiest one is the number of choices of another unpaired element after choosing an unpaired element (element-based choice). But there are at least two more other ways: permutation and pair-based choice. <!--SR:!2025-05-28,154,290!2025-07-20,207,310-->

<!-- list separator -->

- solution
  - solution / element-based choice ::@:: Select an unpaired element (choice 1). Then choose another unpaired element to pair up with (choice 2). The first pairing has _n_ − 1 choices. The second pairing has _n_ − 3 choices, and so on... So the final answer is: $$(2n - 1) \cdot (2n - 3) \cdots 1 \,.$$ <p> Now something difficult with this approach is that it is hard to _intuitively_ justify why we only consider choosing another unpaired element to pair up with after choosing an unpaired element (choice 2), but not simply choosing unpaired element (choice 1). For example, why not $2n \cdot (2n - 1) \cdots 1$? A way to see this is using induction: How many ways are there to pair $2n + 2$ elements given we know the ways to pair $2n$ elements? <!--SR:!2025-07-24,211,310!2025-07-18,205,310-->
  - solution / permutation ::@:: We can exploit that a permutation can also be considered a bijective function from the indices of the elements to themselves. Consider $$P(2n, n) = \frac {(2n)!} {n!}$$. This is the number of bijective functions that maps the indices of _n_ selected elements to themselves. But we can easily make this into pairings by replacing the codomain with the indices of the other _n_ unselected elements. <p> Now, the above can easily double count. But we can find out how many times a particular pairing is counted. Consider an arbitrary pairing between _n_ elements and the other _n_ elements. Now, whenever for every pair in the pairing, one is in the domain while the other is in the codomain, then we will count once. There are 2<sup>_n_</sup> possible ways to choose which _n_ elements are in the (co)domain, so each pairing is counted 2<sup>_n_</sup> times. <p> Finally, we have $$\frac {(2n)!} {n! 2^n} \,.$$ <!--SR:!2025-05-24,150,290!2025-05-23,149,290-->
  - solution / pair-based choice ::@:: Instead of choosing elements, we choose pairs. But note that the order of choosing pair does not matter. So we have $$\frac {\binom {2n} 2 \binom {2n - 2} n \cdots \binom 2 2} {n!} \,.$$ <p> It should be easy to _intuitively_ justify why this method does not double count. <!--SR:!2025-07-27,214,310!2025-01-18,72,310-->

## derangement of students

We have _n_ students and {@{none of them want to sit in their own chairs. How many ways are there to arrange that}@}? (Recurrence relation is accepted.) <!--SR:!2025-01-18,72,310-->

- strategy ::@:: We can use induction. Or we can use the inclusion–exclusion principle (not shown here). Generating functions (also not shown here) can be used to obtain a closed expression. <!--SR:!2025-07-21,208,310!2025-01-18,72,310-->
- number of derangements ::@:: This is known as a derangement. The number of derangements of _n_ distinct elements is also known as the subfactorial of _n_, !_n_, which is related to the factorial of _n_, _n_!, by $$!n = \begin{cases}1 \,, & n = 0 \\ \lfloor n! / e \rceil \,, & n > 0 && \lfloor * \rceil\text{ denotes the nearest integer} \,. \end{cases}$$ <!--SR:!2025-10-29,288,330!2025-01-18,72,310-->

<!-- list separator -->

- solution
  - solution / induction / base cases ::@:: There is 1 derangement for 0 students. There are 0 derangements for 1 student. <!--SR:!2025-01-17,71,310!2025-01-18,72,310-->
  - solution / induction / induction step ::@:: We consider a student _i_ sitting at the seat _j_. There are _n_ − 1 possible _j_. <p> Then student _j_ either sits at the seat _i_ or not. <p> If the student _j_ sits at the seat _i_, then the number of derangement is the number of derangement for _n_ − 2 students, because we can remove student _i_ and _j_ without affecting the others. <p> If the student _j_ does not sit at the seat _i_, then consider the number of wrong seats for student _j_ and other students. For other students, there are _n_ − 2 wrong seats. For student _j_, there are also _n_ − 2 wrong seats (seat _i_ is excluded). So the number of derangement is the number of derangement for _n_ − 1 students, because in such an derangement, every student has _n_ − 2 wrong seats. <p> Finally, the recurrence relation is $$d_n = (n - 1) (d_{n - 1} + d_{n - 2}) \,.$$ <!--SR:!2025-05-22,148,290!2025-07-26,213,310-->

## permutations with forbidden positions

There are 9 girls and 73 boys in our class of 82 students. <!-- Gender inequality... --> How many {@{permutations exist, given the following restrictions}@}: <!--SR:!2025-01-17,71,310-->

1. All girls are before boys.
2. The first 41 students include 7 girls and 34 boys.
3. No 3 girls are together. (Recurrence relations are accepted. No need to care about base cases for now.)

- strategy ::@:: Be very familiar with permutations and choices. For the last restriction, also make use of recurrence relations. <!--SR:!2025-07-19,206,310!2025-01-18,72,310-->
  - strategy / restriction: no 3 girls are together ::@:: Let $a(b, g)$ be the number of valid permutations. <p> Realize that every valid permutation can be classified into 3 cases: beginning with a boy, beginning with exactly one girl, or beginning with exactly two girls. <p> Also realize that removing any number of consecutive students from the beginning of a valid permutations still yields a valid permutation, but with less students. <!--SR:!2025-05-22,148,290!2025-05-25,151,290-->

## number of rectangles in a grid

How many {@{rectangles are there in a _n_-by-_m_ grid}@}? <!--SR:!2025-01-18,72,310-->

- strategy ::@:: Consider the 4 edges of a rectangle. <!--SR:!2025-01-18,72,310!2025-01-18,72,310-->

<!-- list separator -->

- solution ::@:: A rectangle is uniquely identified by its 4 edges. There are 2 horizontal and 2 vertical edges to choose from the grid. Without (unnecessarily) distinguishing which of _n_ and _m_ is vertical or horizontal, notice that we can choose 2 edges from _n_ + 1 edges and choose the other 2 edges from _m_ + 1 edges. So the answer is: $$\binom {n + 1} 2 \binom {m + 1} 2\,.$$ <!--SR:!2025-01-18,72,310!2025-01-17,71,310-->

## number of routes in a grid (choice)

How many {@{routes are there in a _n_-by-_m_ grid from the bottom-left corner to the top-right corner, assuming we can only either walk up or right}@}? (Use the method of choosing.) <!--SR:!2025-11-03,293,330-->

- strategy ::@:: Consider the invariants of a route. In particular, the invariant is the number of upward walks, rightward walks, and the total number of walks. Then choose something... <!--SR:!2025-02-24,95,290!2025-01-18,72,310-->

<!-- list separator -->

- solution ::@:: Without loss of generality, assume _n_ is the vertical height of the grid. <p> Any route from the bottom-left corner to the top-right corner in a _n_-by-_m_ grid must involve _n_ upward walks, _m_ rightward walks, and _n_ + _m_ total walks. Also, the route is uniquely determined by its sequence of upward and rightward walks. <p> The sequence has _n_ + _m_ total walks, and we choose _n_ walks of them to be upward walks (or _m_ walks of them to be rightward walks). So the answer is $$\binom {n + m} n = \binom {n + m} m \,.$$ <!--SR:!2025-01-18,72,310!2025-07-23,210,310-->
