---
aliases:
  - COMP 2711H question on 2024-09-04
  - COMP 2711H questions on 2024-09-04
  - COMP2711H question on 2024-09-04
  - COMP2711H questions on 2024-09-04
  - HKUST COMP 2711H question on 2024-09-04
  - HKUST COMP 2711H questions on 2024-09-04
  - HKUST COMP2711H question on 2024-09-04
  - HKUST COMP2711H questions on 2024-09-04
tags:
  - flashcard/active/special/academia/HKUST/COMP_2711H/questions/2024-09-04
  - language/in/English
---

# questions on 2024-09-04

- HKUST COMP 2711H

## arithmetic sum

Prove that {@{$$1 + 2 + \cdots + n = \frac {n (n + 1)} 2 \qquad \forall n \in \mathbb N_0$$}@}. <!--SR:!2025-08-19,264,340-->

- strategy ::@:: Induction, obviously. But you could also use the well-ordering principle here if you so desire... <!--SR:!2028-05-11,1030,340!2027-09-16,843,340-->

1. base case ::@:: The statement obviously holds when $n = 0$. <!--SR:!2028-08-12,1106,350!2027-07-07,791,340-->
2. induction ::@:: Assume $$\sum_{k = 1}^n k = \frac {n (n + 1)} 2$$ is true. Then $$\sum_{k = 1}^{n + 1} k = \sum_{k = 1}^n k + (n + 1) = \frac {n(n + 1)} 2 + (n + 1) = \frac{(n + 2)(n + 1)} 2$$. By induction, this holds for all natural numbers $\mathbb N_0$. <!--SR:!2027-05-30,765,340!2027-03-18,708,340-->

## irrationality of the square root of 2

Prove that {@{$\sqrt 2$ is irrational}@}. <!--SR:!2025-09-04,257,320-->

- strategy ::@:: Assume $\sqrt 2$ is rational. Create an infinite descent of natural numbers. Then prove the opposite by contradiction. <!--SR:!2025-10-21,315,340!2027-11-25,902,340-->

1. assumption ::@:: Assume $\sqrt 2$ is rational. Then $\sqrt 2 = a / b$, where $a, b \in \mathbb N_0$. <!--SR:!2025-09-27,296,340!2025-09-01,275,340-->
2. construction ::@:: $$\begin{aligned} \sqrt 2 & = \frac a b \\ 2 & = \frac {a^2} {b^2} \\ 2b^2 & = a^2 \\ & \implies 2 \mid a \\ a & := 2c && c \in \mathbb N_0 \\ \\ 2b^2 & = 4c^2 \\ b^2 & = 2c^2 \\ & \implies 2 \mid b \\ b & := 2d && d \in \mathbb N_0 \\ \\ \sqrt 2 & = \frac a b = \frac {2c} {2d} = \frac c d \end{aligned}$$ <!--SR:!2025-11-10,328,340!2025-08-28,271,340-->
3. conclusion ::@:: From $\sqrt 2 = a / b$, we have derived that $\sqrt 2 = c / d$. Note that $c$ and $d$ are natural numbers smaller than $a$ and $b$ respectively. That means if we can write $\sqrt 2$ as a ratio of two natural numbers, we can always find smaller natural numbers representing the same $\sqrt 2$. This process can be applied recursively to get an infinite descent of natural numbers. But such an sequence cannot exist, so our premise that $\sqrt 2$ is rational is false, so $\sqrt 2$ is irrational. <!--SR:!2025-12-15,361,357!2026-07-21,479,320-->

## infinitely many prime numbers

Prove that {@{there are infinitely many prime numbers}@}. <!--SR:!2027-03-29,716,340-->

- strategy ::@:: Assume there are finitely many prime numbers. Consider the product of all prime numbers plus one. Prove the opposite by constructing an infinite descent, and thus contradiction. <!--SR:!2025-08-11,258,340!2027-01-10,631,320-->

1. assumption ::@:: Assume there are finitely many prime numbers $p_1, \ldots p_n$. <!--SR:!2025-11-21,343,357!2028-10-16,1170,360-->
2. construction ::@::　Consider the product of all prime numbers plus one: $$n = \prod_{k = 1}^n p_k + 1$$. $n$ cannot be prime because $n$ is not in the set of all prime numbers. Hence, $n$ is composite and $n = ab$, where $a$ and $b$ are natural numbers that are greater than $1$. But $a$ and $b$ cannot be any of the prime numbers because no prime numbers divide $n$ evenly. So they are also composite, and we can decompose them like how we decompose $n$. Recursively apply this process. Nowhere in the process can any prime numbers appear because if it were to appear, then said prime number could have divided $n$. So the process will never terminate. <!--SR:!2026-09-20,557,320!2026-10-06,570,320-->
3. conclusion ::@:: Note that decomposing a natural number into a product of two natural numbers both greater than 1 produce a sequence of strictly decreasing natural numbers. This is an infinite descent, and thus impossible. So the original assumption that there are finitely many prime numbers is false. So there are infinitely many prime numbers. <!--SR:!2026-10-02,557,320!2027-09-06,827,330-->

## pigeonhole principle

Prove {@{the pigeonhole principle: if we have $n \ge 1$ "holes" and $n + 1$ or more "pigeons", at least 1 "hole" contains 2 or more "pigeons"}@}. <!--SR:!2027-09-18,845,340-->

- strategy ::@:: This is intuitive. But we want to use induction here... <!--SR:!2025-11-01,323,340!2025-10-25,319,340-->

1. base case ::@:: When $n = 1$, there are 2 or more "pigeons". There is only 1 "hole" to put them into, so the 1 "hole" contains 2 or more "pigeons". This proves the base case. <!--SR:!2027-09-24,845,330!2028-04-08,990,340-->
2. induction ::@:: Assume the pigeonhole principle is true for $n$ "holes". Consider $n + 1$ "holes" and $n + 2$ or more "pigeons". If we put 2 or more "pigeons" into 1 "hole" then the pigeonhole principle is automatically proved. So consider putting 0 and 1 "pigeon" into the new extra "hole". If we put 0, then there are $n + 2$ or more "pigeons" for the remaining $n$ "holes", for which we know the pigeonhole principle is true. If we put 1, then there are $n + 1$ or more "pigeons" for the remaining $n$ "holes", for which we also know the pigeonhole principle is true. So the pigeonhole principle is true no matter how many "pigeons" we put into the new extra "hole", proving the pigeonhole principle. By induction, this is true for all $n \ge 1$. <!--SR:!2028-06-02,1030,340!2027-01-13,636,320-->

## all cars are of the same color

What is wrong with the following proof? ::@:: When there is 1 car, it has the same color obviously. Assume $n$ cars have the same color. Now consider $n + 1$ cars. The first $n$ cars have the same color, and the last $n$ cars also have the same color. There are $n - 1$ cars in common between them, so the colors of the two sets of car are the same. <!--SR:!2025-11-25,343,340!2028-10-15,1170,360-->

- strategy ::@:: Consider when there are exactly 2 cars. Try proving $P(2)$ from $P(1)$. <!--SR:!2025-08-31,274,340!2025-12-02,348,340-->
- takeaway ::@:: This is a pretty silly example, but the same thing may occur in a much less obvious way when doing induction. To avoid this, it is best to check that induction works for small $n$ (at least do so in your mind).  A possible sign that your induction argument does not work is having $n - 1$, $n - 2$, etc. in your expressions. <!--SR:!2026-01-28,397,358!2026-01-05,377,358-->

1. solution ::@:: The induction argument fails to prove the above proposition for $n = 2$. When $n = 2$, we say the first $n - 1 = 1$ car has the same color, and the last $1$ car also has the same color. But they have $0$ cars in common, so we cannot say the two sets of cars have the same colors. <!--SR:!2025-11-20,338,340!2025-11-24,341,340-->

## ranking players in a tournament

Prove that {@{in a tournament where each player plays against another player exactly once and every game has exactly one winner, we can always rank the $n$ players $p_1, \ldots, p_n$ such that $p_k$ has lost to $p_{k + 1}$ for all $1 \le k \le n - 1$}@}. <!--SR:!2027-04-01,712,330-->

- strategy ::@:: Use induction here. In particular, design an algorithm that solves the problem for 0 players (trivial), then incrementally adds 1 player while satisfying the ranking requirement above, until all $n$ players are added. If such an algorithm exists, it corresponds to a mathematical proof by the Curry–Howard correspondence. <!--SR:!2025-10-11,307,340!2028-06-29,1082,357-->
- note ::@:: This is also a graph theory problem. Let each player $p_k$ be a node. An arrow connects $p_a$ to $p_b$ if $p_a$ loses to $p_b$. The problem then becomes if we can visit all nodes exactly once by following the arrows. <!--SR:!2025-10-31,322,340!2025-09-16,285,330-->

1. base case ::@:: When there are 0 players or 1 player, the above ranking requirement is satisfied. <!--SR:!2025-08-09,256,340!2026-05-21,461,310-->
2. induction ::@:: Assume there is a permutation of $n$ players, $p_1, \ldots p_n$ satisfying the above ranking requirement. Add a new player $p_{n + 1}$ to the tournament. The new player plays against the existing $n$ players and either wins or loses. We can design an algorithm that adds $p_{n + 1}$ to the permutation while satisfying the above ranking requirement. Consider adding the player after $p_n$. If $p_n$ loses to $p_{n + 1}$, then the algorithm stops. Otherwise, it considers adding it after $p_{n - 1}$. If $p_{n - 1}$ loses to $p_{n + 1}$, then the algorithm stops. Repeat this until the algorithm stops or the algorithm has reached before $p_1$. When the algorithm has reached before $p_1$, that means $p_{n + 1}$ loses to everyone else, including $p_1$, so placing it before $p_1$ also satisfies the ranking requirement. This proves that if there is a solution for $n$ players, then there is also a solution for $n + 1$ players. By induction, there is a solution for all natural numbers. <!--SR:!2027-11-11,889,340!2026-02-10,375,300-->

## infinite descent to well-ordering principle

Prove {@{the well-ordering principle from infinite descent}@}. <!--SR:!2025-10-12,308,340-->

- strategy ::@:: Prove by contradiction. Think of ways to relate the well-ordering principle to natural numbers. One way they are related is that the well-ordering principle says any _nonempty_ set of natural numbers has a least natural number. So assume that the well-ordering principle does not hold, and there is an _nonempty_ set of natural numbers that does not have a least natural number. <!--SR:!2025-11-22,317,300!2028-06-07,1035,340-->
- note <!-- flashcard ID: e2c26204-5570-47a0-aac4-6fd475eb16f7 -->::@:: Induction and infinite descent are logically equivalent, so it is possible to prove one from the other. However, the well-ordering principle is implied by induction or infinite descent, but not the reverse, so is not equivalent (under the other Peano axioms). <!--SR:!2025-09-11,264,338!2026-01-27,397,358-->

1. assumption ::@:: Assume infinite descent holds but not the well-ordering principle. <!--SR:!2025-08-27,270,340!2028-01-01,923,340-->
2. construction ::@:: Let $A$ be an nonempty set of natural numbers without a least natural number, which is permitted because the well-ordering principle does not hold. Choose an arbitrary natural number $a$ from $A$. Consider the subset of $A$ that is smaller than $a$. The subset must not be empty, or otherwise $a$ would be the least natural number of $A$. Now repeat the process again, but for the subset. Recursively apply this process. <!--SR:!2026-07-28,516,320!2026-03-05,372,300-->
3. conclusion ::@:: If we record the natural numbers $a_1, \ldots$ that we used to make the subsets in this infinite process is a strictly decreasing infinite sequence of natural numbers. But this contradicts infinite descent. So our assumption that the well-ordering principle does not hold is wrong, so the well-ordering principle holds if infinite descent holds. <!--SR:!2028-09-02,1127,350!2025-10-13,307,340-->

## well-ordering principle to induction with an additional assumption

Prove {@{induction from the well-ordering principle, additionally assuming every natural number is either $0$ or the successor of another natural number}@}. <!--SR:!2028-03-05,977,340-->

- the additional assumption ::@:: The additional assumption is required for the well-ordering principle to imply induction. In fact, the well-ordering principle is not equivalent to induction (under the other Peano axioms). This common mistake is due to proofs assuming the least element of an nonempty set must be either $0$ or the successor of another natural number $b$, i.e. $S(b)$, but this is not implied by the other Peano axioms except for the induction axiom, the thing that we are trying to prove. <!--SR:!2026-02-21,373,373!2026-01-30,356,373-->
- strategy ::@:: Prove by contradiction. Assume induction fails by assuming there is a set that satisfies the induction conditions but not its conclusion. Note that the additional assumption is required. <!--SR:!2026-01-14,335,290!2025-08-14,240,320-->
- note <!-- flashcard ID: 1f354247-234f-417b-ad89-a3040c04715f -->::@:: Induction and infinite descent are logically equivalent, so it is possible to prove one from the other. However, the well-ordering principle is implied by induction or infinite descent, but not the reverse, so is not equivalent (under the other Peano axioms). <!--SR:!2028-07-26,1104,358!2026-01-13,385,358-->

1. assumption ::@:: Assume the well-ordering principle holds but not induction. <!--SR:!2028-02-05,958,340!2025-09-26,295,340-->
2. construction ::@:: Let $K$ be a set of natural numbers such that $0 \in K$ and $n \in K \rightarrow S(n) \in K$ (induction conditions), but $K \ne \mathbb{N}_0$ (induction conclusion). Consider the set $A := \mathbb{N}_0 - K$, i.e. numbers in the natural numbers but not in $K$. This set is _nonempty_ because $K$ is a subset of the natural numbers (all of its elements are natural numbers) but does not equal the natural numbers. By the well-ordering principle, $A$ has an least element $a \in \mathbb{N}_0$. <!--SR:!2025-10-07,280,300!2026-10-21,592,340-->
3. conclusion ::@::  Now, either $a = 0$ or is a successor of another natural number $a := S(b)$ by the additional assumption. If $a = 0$, this directly contradicts that $0 \in K$. If $a = S(b)$, then $b$ must be in $K$ because if $b$ is not in $K$, then $a$ would not be the least element of $A$. But since $b \in K$, then $S(b) = a \in K$ by the definition of $K$. This contradicts that $a$ is not in $K$. So the original assumption that induction does not hold is false, so induction holds if the well-ordering principle and the additional assumption hold. <!--SR:!2027-06-24,719,320!2027-03-16,706,340-->

## induction to infinite descend

Prove {@{infinite descend from induction}@}. <!--SR:!2026-04-01,439,376-->

- strategy ::@:: Prove by contradiction. Assume induction holds, but infinite descend fails by assuming there is an infinite sequence of strictly decreasing natural numbers. <!--SR:!2025-11-06,316,356!2026-03-31,438,376-->
- note <!-- flashcard ID: 6ba8c155-6f06-42cc-a831-59c4fa17a01f -->::@:: Induction and infinite descent are logically equivalent, so it is possible to prove one from the other. However, the well-ordering principle is implied by induction or infinite descent, but not the reverse, so is not equivalent (under the other Peano axioms). <!--SR:!2025-11-15,308,356!2025-12-01,318,356-->

1. assumption ::@:: Assume induction holds but not infinite descend. Let $a_0, a_{S(0)}, \ldots$ be an infinite sequence of strictly decreasing natural numbers, indexed by natural numbers. That is, $a_i$ is the $i$-th item of the infinite sequence, where $a_i, i \in \mathbb N_0$. <!--SR:!2025-10-14,297,355!2025-12-02,319,355-->
2. construction ::@:: Consider the predicate $$P(n) := (\forall i \in \mathbb N_0) (a_i \ne n)$$, which states every element of the infinite sequence cannot be $n$. We can prove the above predicate holds for all $n \in \mathbb N_0$ by (strong) induction. <!--SR:!2025-11-07,317,356!2025-10-13,296,355-->
3. base case ::@:: Consider $P(0)$. If $a_i = 0$, then $a_{S(i)}$ cannot exist as $0$ is the least element of $\mathbb N_0$. Yet, this contradicts that the sequence is infinite, so the above predicate is true for $0$. <!--SR:!2028-04-09,991,356!2025-11-04,314,355-->
4. induction ::@:: Assume $P(m')$ holds if $m'$ is not larger than some natural number $m \in \mathbb N_0$, i.e. $(\forall m' \le m)(P(m'))$ is true. (This is the induction hypothesis of strong induction as opposed to ordinary induction.) Consider $P(S(m))$. If $a_i = S(m)$, then $a_{S(i)} < a_i = S(m) \implies a_{S(i)} \le m$. But we know that $a_{S(i)}$ cannot be smaller or equal to $m$ from the induction hypothesis, so $a_{S(i)}$ does not exist. Yet, this contradicts that the sequence is infinite, so the above predicate is true for $S(m)$. <!--SR:!2027-11-08,869,356!2027-03-13,629,336-->
5. conclusion ::@:: By (strong) induction, we have proved that every element of the infinite sequence cannot be a natural number, i.e. $a_i \notin \mathbb N_0$. This contradicts that the sequence is made of natural numbers. By contradiction, an infinite sequence of strictly decreasing natural numbers does not exist, i.e., infinite descent holds. <!--SR:!2026-04-02,440,376!2026-12-04,619,356-->
