---
aliases:
  - COMP 2711H question on 2024-09-11
  - COMP 2711H questions on 2024-09-11
  - COMP2711H question on 2024-09-11
  - COMP2711H questions on 2024-09-11
  - HKUST COMP 2711H question on 2024-09-11
  - HKUST COMP 2711H questions on 2024-09-11
  - HKUST COMP2711H question on 2024-09-11
  - HKUST COMP2711H questions on 2024-09-11
tags:
  - flashcard/active/special/academia/HKUST/COMP_2711H/questions/2024-09-11
  - language/in/English
---

# questions on 2024-09-11

- HKUST COMP 2711H

## queueing _n_ people

How many ways are there to {@{queue _n_ people}@}? <!--SR:!2025-09-10,254,330-->

- solution ::@:: There are _n_ people to choose for the 1st slot, _n_ - 1 people to choose for the 2nd slot, ..., and 1 person to choose for the _n_-th (last) slot. So the number of ways is _n_!. <!--SR:!2025-09-13,257,330!2025-09-14,258,330-->
  - solution / generating function
    - solution / generating function / setup: introduction ::@:: Since generating functions are associated with sequences, we let the sequence $a_0, a_1, \ldots$, where $a_n$ represents the number of ways to queue _n_ people. <!--SR:!2025-09-13,257,330!2025-09-14,258,330-->
    - solution / generating function / setup: generating function ::@:: Since the _n_ people are distinct (labelled objects), we use an exponential generating function (EGF). The appropriate generating function for this question is: $$\sum_{n = 0}^\infty a_n \frac {x^n} {n!} = A(x) = \prod_{k = 1}^n \left(\frac {x^0} {0!} + \frac {x^1} {1!}\right) = \prod_{k = 1}^n (1 + x) = (1 + x)^n \,.$$ Each $(1 + x)$ terms represent a person. The $1$ represent not choosing the person while $x$ represent choosing the person. The _n_-th power of $(1 + x)$ represents having _n_ people. <!--SR:!2025-09-16,260,330!2025-09-12,256,330-->
    - solution / generating function / steps ::@:: The number of ways to queue _n_ people is given by the coefficient of $\frac {x^n} {n!}$ (the factorial factor is because we are using an EGF). Using $\left[\frac {x^n} {n!} \right] A(x)$ to represent extracting the coefficient (which is $a_n$, the number we want) of $\frac {x^n} {n!}$ from $A(x)$: $$\begin{aligned} & \phantom = \left[\frac {x^n} {n!} \right] A(x) \\ & = \left[\frac {x^n} {n!} \right] (1 + x)^n \\ & = \left[\frac {x^n} {n!} \right] \sum_{k = 0}^n \binom n k x^k \\ & = \left[\frac {x^n} {n!} \right] \sum_{k = 0}^n \frac {n!} {(n - k)!} \frac {x^k} {k!} \\ & = \frac {n!} {(n - n)!} \\ & = n! && 0! = 1 \,. \end{aligned}$$ This gives $n!$, as expected. <!--SR:!2025-03-21,114,290!2025-07-05,187,310-->

## queueing _k_ people from _n_ people

How many ways are there to {@{queue _k_ people from _n_ people}@}? <!--SR:!2025-09-10,254,330-->

- solution ::@:: There are _n_ people to choose for the 1st slot, _n_ - 1 people to choose for the 2nd slot, ..., and _n_ - _k_ + 1 people to choose for _k_-th (last) slot. So the number of ways is _n_!/(_n_ - _k_)!. <!--SR:!2025-09-17,261,330!2025-09-11,255,330-->
  - solution / generating function ::@:: The exponential generating function (exponential because labelled) is $$\sum_{n = 0}^\infty a_n \frac {x^n} {n!} = A(x) = \prod_{k = 1}^n (1 + x) = (1 + x)^n \,.$$. This is the same as the last question. But this time, we extract the coefficient (which is $a_k$, the number we want) of the $\frac {x^k} {k!}$ term. So the answer is: $$\begin{aligned} & \phantom = \left[\frac {x^k} {k!} \right] A(x) \\ & = \left[\frac {x^k} {k!} \right] (1 + x)^n \\ & = \left[\frac {x^k} {k!} \right] \sum_{j = 0}^n \binom n j x^j \\ & = \left[\frac {x^k} {k!} \right] \sum_{j = 0}^n \frac {n!} {(n - j)!} \frac {x^j} {j!} \\ & = \frac {n!} {(n - k)!} \,. \end{aligned}$$ This gives _n_!/(_n_ - _k_)!, as expected. <!--SR:!2025-04-18,128,290!2025-04-18,128,290-->

## permutations of a word: AABB

"HKUST" has {@{5!}@} permutations, because all characters are different. But {@{what about "AABB"}@}? <!--SR:!2025-09-13,257,330!2025-09-09,253,330-->

- solution ::@:: Assume the 4 characters are different. Then there are 4! permutations. But we can swap the 2 "A"s among themselves. We can also swap the 2 "B"s among themselves. So we need to divide by 2! for "A"s and then divide by 2! again for "B"s. In the end, we have 4!/(2! \* 2!) = 24/4 = 6 permutations. <!--SR:!2025-09-19,263,330!2025-09-14,258,330-->
  - solution / generating function ::@:: Think of the 2 "A"s as a group. Think of the 2 "B"s as a group. The exponential generating function is given by: $$\sum_{n = 0}^\infty a_n \frac {x^n} {n!} = A(x) = \left(\frac {x^0} {0!} + \frac {x^1} {1!} + \frac {x^2} {2!} \right)^2 = \left(1 + x + \frac {x^2} 2 \right)^2 \,.$$ The term $1$ represent not choosing any "A"s. The term $x$ represent choosing 1 "A"s. The term $x^2 / 2$ represent choosing both "A"s, divided by 2! so that we ignore the "A"s swapping among themselves. Same situation for the "B"s, so we square the entire term. Since the final word is also 4 characters, we want to extract the coefficient $a_4$ of the term $\frac {x^4} {4!}$. This gives $$\begin{aligned} & \phantom = \left[\frac {x^4} {4!} \right] A(x) \\ & = \left[\frac {x^4} {4!} \right] \left(1 + x + \frac {x^2} 2 \right)^2 \\ & = \left[\frac {x^4} {4!} \right] \left(\cdots + \frac {x^4} 4 \right) \\ & = \left[\frac {x^4} {4!} \right] \left(\cdots + 6 \frac {x^4} {4!} \right) \\ & = 6 \,. \end{aligned}$$ The answer is 6, as expected. <!--SR:!2025-06-30,182,310!2025-07-03,185,310-->

## number of subsets of a set

How many {@{subsets (including the empty set and the entire set itself) does a set of size _n_ have}@}? <!--SR:!2025-09-08,252,330-->

- solution ::@:: For each element in the set, we can choose to exclude or include it in the subset. So there are $2^n$ possible choices, and thus $2^n$ subsets. <!--SR:!2025-09-13,257,330!2025-09-15,259,330-->
  - solution / generating function ::@:: Let $a_0, a_1, \ldots$ be a sequence where $a_k$ is the number of subsets of size $k$. Since this time, we do not care about the order of elements in a set (a set is unordered), so we use the ordinary generating function. It is given by $$\sum_{k = 0}^n a_k x^k = A(x) = (1 + x)^n \,.$$. The $1$ represent not choosing an element, while the $x$ represent choosing an element. The $*^n$ power represent there are $n$ distinct elements to be chosen from. This time we want the sum of the coefficients $a_0, \ldots, a_k$, because we want subsets of all sizes. Some algebraic manipulation gives: $$\begin{aligned} A(x) & = (1 + x)^n \\ (1 + x)^n & = \sum_{k = 0}^n \binom n k x^k \\ (1 + 1)^n & = \sum_{k = 0}^n \binom n k 1^k && \text{this trick gives the coefficient sum} \\ 2^n & = \sum_{k = 0}^n \binom n k \,. \end{aligned}$$ So the answer is 2<sup>_n_</sup>, as expected. Notice this also gives a well-known identity for the binomial coefficients. <!--SR:!2025-07-06,188,310!2025-07-04,186,310-->

## number of subsets of a set containing a fixed element

Let there be an nonempty set $A$ of size _n_. Fix an element $a \in A$. How many {@{subsets (including the empty set and the entire set itself) does the set $A$ have}@}? <!--SR:!2025-09-15,259,330-->

- solution ::@:: Since the subset must have the element $a$, there is only one choice for whether to include said element. However, everything else is unchanged, so there are $2^{n - 1}$ possible subsets. <!--SR:!2025-09-18,262,330!2025-09-19,263,330-->
  - solution / generating function ::@:: Same as the last question, except that one of the term becomes $x$ instead of $(1 + x)$. Let's find the sum of coefficients $a_0, \ldots, a_k$ in the ordinary generating function: $$\begin{aligned} A(x) & = x (1 + x)^{n - 1} \\ x (1 + x)^{n - 1} & = x \sum_{k = 0}^{n - 1} \binom {n - 1} k x^k \\ & = \sum_{k = 0}^{n - 1} \binom {n - 1} k x^{k + 1} \\ 1(1 + 1)^{n - 1} & = \sum_{k = 0}^{n - 1} \binom {n - 1} k 1^{k + 1} \\ 2^{n - 1} & = \sum_{k = 0}^{n - 1} \binom {n - 1} k \,. \end{aligned}$$ This gives 2<sup>_n_ − 1</sup>, as expected. <!--SR:!2025-07-03,185,310!2025-09-12,256,330-->

## number of even subsets of a set

How many {@{subsets (including the empty set and the entire set itself) that has an even number of elements does a set of size _n_ have}@}? <!--SR:!2025-09-12,256,330-->

- solution
  - solution / summation ::@:: Consider 6 elements. The sum would be given by $$\frac {6!} {6!0!} + \frac {6!} {4!2!} + \frac {6!} {2!4!} + \frac {6!} {0!6!} \,.$$ The terms are obtained by considering select 0 elements, 2 elements, 4 elements, and 6 elements. In general, the sum is $$\sum_{k = 0}^{\lfloor n / 2 \rfloor} \frac {n!} {2k!(n - 2k)!} = \sum_{k = 0}^{\lfloor n / 2 \rfloor} \binom n {2k} \,.$$ Now consider the binomial expansion of both $(1 + 1)^n$ and $(1 - 1)^n$: $$\begin{aligned} (1 + 1)^n & = \sum_{k = 0}^n \binom n k \\ (1 - 1)^n & = \sum_{k = 0}^n (-1)^k \binom n k \,. \end{aligned}$$ If we add the above two expressions together, we get $2^n$ on the left hand side and two times the sum we want to calculate on the right hand side. So divide it by 2 to get the sum we want. Hence the answer is $2^n / 2 = 2^{n - 1}$. <!--SR:!2025-03-19,112,290!2025-07-05,187,310-->
    - solution / summation / generalization ::@:: The above argument can be generalized to the number of subsets that has a size divisible by an arbitrary natural number, if you know complex number and discrete Fourier transform... For a hint, notice that $-1$ is the 2nd primitive root of unity because $-1^2 = 1$. <!--SR:!2025-09-10,254,330!2025-09-08,252,330-->
  - solution / combinatorial ::@:: For the first _n_ - 1 elements, we can freely choose whether to include it. For the last element, if we have included even number of elements, then we must not include it, and if we have included odd number of elements, we must include it. So there is only 1 choice for the last element. Thus there are $2^{n - 1}$ even subsets. <!--SR:!2025-09-09,253,330!2025-09-08,252,330-->
  - solution / generating function ::@:: Same as before, the ordinary generating function for all subsets (not just even) is $$\sum_{k = 0}^n a_k x^k = A(x) = (1 + x)^n \,.$$. Now we want to filter for even subsets. To do that, we can convolute the generating function with another generating function representing the sequence $(1, 0, 1, 0, \ldots)$, which is $$\frac 1 {1 - x^2} = \sum_{k = 0}^\infty x^{2k} \qquad \text{Maclaurin series}$$. After the convolution, the coefficient of $x^n$ will be the sum of coefficients for even powers of $x$ in $A(x)$, which is our answer. Solving: $$\begin{aligned} & \phantom = \left[x^n \right] \frac {A(x)} {1 - x^2} \\ & = \left[x^n \right] \frac {(1 + x)^n} {1 - x^2} \\ & = \left[x^n \right] \frac {(1 + x)^{n - 1} } {1 - x} \\ & = \left[x^n \right] \left((1 + x)^{n - 2} + \frac {(1 + x)^{n - 2} 2x} {1 - x} \right) \\ & = \left[x^n \right] \left(\cdots + \frac {2^{n - 1} x^{n - 1} } {1 - x} \right) && \text{coefficients of }x^n\text{ is 0 for }\cdots \\ & = 2^{n - 1} \left[x^n \right] x^{n - 1} \frac 1 {1 - x} \\ & = 2^{n - 1} && \frac 1 {1 - x}\text{ is the sequence for }(1, 1, \ldots) \end{aligned} \,.$$ The answer is 2<sup>_n_ - 1</sup>, as expected. <p> If you want to generalize this to the number of subsets that has a size divisible by an arbitrary natural number, a different approach is needed. See [generating function § enumerating arithmetic progressions of sequences](../../../../../general/generating%20function.md#enumerating%20arithmetic%20progressions%20of%20sequences) for a hint on generalizing this. <!--SR:!2025-03-20,113,290!2025-07-08,190,310-->

## sum of binomial coefficients: combinatorial argument

Prove {@{$$\sum_{k = 0}^n \binom n k = 2^n$$ using combinatorial argument}@}. <!--SR:!2025-09-16,260,330-->

- solution ::@:: Each binomial coefficients correspond to choosing _k_ items from _n_ items. Since we sum from _0_ to _k_, this is simply the number of subsets of a set of size _n_. The answer is 2<sup>_n_</sup>. <!--SR:!2025-09-19,263,330!2025-09-09,253,330-->

## alternating sum of binomial coefficients: combinatorial argument

Prove {@{$$\sum_{k = 0}^n (-1)^k \binom n k = 0$$ using combinatorial argument}@}. <!--SR:!2025-09-11,255,330-->

- solution ::@:: Consider a set of size _n_. There are 2<sup>_n_ - 1</sup> even subsets. This corresponds to the positive part of our sum, as we have proven before. Since a set is either even or odd, there are 2<sup>_n_</sup> − 2<sup>_n_ − 1</sup> = 2<sup>_n_ − 1</sup> odd subsets. This corresponds to the negative part of our sum. Since the positive and negative parts are the same, they cancel out to give 0. <!--SR:!2025-09-18,262,330!2025-09-19,263,330-->

## binomial coefficient and multiplication: double counting

Prove that {@{$$k \binom n k = n \binom {n - 1} {k - 1}$$, where $n \ge k \ge 1$ using double counting}@}. <!--SR:!2025-09-17,261,330-->

- solution ::@:: For the left hand side, we choose _k_ people from _n_ people. Then we make one of the chosen people the captain. This corresponds to $k \binom n k$. For the right hand side, we choose a captain from _n_ people. The captain is also implicitly chosen. Then we need to select _k_ − 1 more people from _n_ − 1 people. This corresponds to $n \binom {n - 1} {k - 1}$. Since they are counting the same thing, they are equal. <!--SR:!2025-07-04,186,310!2025-09-17,261,330-->

## binomial coefficient and Pascal's triangle: double counting

Prove {@{the well-known identity $$\binom n k = \binom {n - 1} k + \binom {n - 1} {k - 1}$$, where $n - 1 \ge k$, using double counting}@}. This identity also relates {@{the binomial coefficient to Pascal's triangle}@}. <!--SR:!2025-09-18,262,330!2025-09-16,260,330-->

- solution ::@:: For the left hand side, we choose _k_ people from _n_ people. This corresponds to $\binom n k$. For the right hand side, we pick a fixed person from _k_ people. If we choose that person, we need to select _k_ − 1 more people from _n_ − 1 people. If we do not choose that person, we need to select _k_ more people from _n_ − 1 people. This corresponds to $\binom {n - 1} k + \binom {n - 1} {k - 1}$. Since they are counting the same thing, they are equal. <!--SR:!2025-09-15,259,330!2025-09-11,255,330-->

## double binomial coefficients: combinatorial argument

Prove that {@{$$\sum_{0 \le j \le i \le n} \binom n i \binom i j = 3^n$$ using combinatorial argument}@}. <!--SR:!2025-09-14,258,330-->

- solution ::@:: For the left hand side, we have _n_ students. We assign _i_ students A range. Then out of those _i_ students, we assign _j_ students A+. This corresponds to $\sum_{0 \le j \le i \le n} \binom n i \binom i j$. For the right hand side, we have _n_ students. Each student either has no A range and A+, has A range but not A+, or has both A range and A+. There are 3 possibilities for each student. This corresponds to $3^n$. Since they are counting the same thing, they are equal. <!--SR:!2025-09-11,255,330!2025-09-18,262,330-->

## composition of 10

How many {@{solutions does $x_1 + x_2 + x_3 + x_4 = 10$ have if all variables are nonnegative}@}? <!--SR:!2025-09-15,259,330-->

- solution ::@:: We can think of 10 as a line of 10 balls. There are 4 variables, so we separate the 10 balls into 4 sections by 4 balls. The variables are distinct, so order matters and we do not need to consider composition that only differs in their orders. (Otherwise, this would become integer partition instead.) There are 11 slots for wall 1, 12 slots for wall 2, and then 13 slots for wall 3. (Note that the variables can be zero.) Now note that the walls being inserted in a different order does not matter, so we need to divide by 3!. So the answer is $$\frac {13!} {10! 3!} = \binom {13} {10} \,.$$ In general, for _r_ variables to add up to _n_, there are $$\frac {(n + r - 1)!} {n! (r - 1)!} = \binom {n + r - 1} n = \left(\!\! \binom r n \!\!\right)$$ solutions.  ($\left(\!\! \binom r n \!\!\right)$ is the multiset coefficient, representing the number of combinations to choose _n_ items from _r_ distinct items, repeats allowed.) <!--SR:!2025-07-01,183,310!2025-07-02,184,310-->
  - solution / note ::@:: This method is also known as [stars and bars](../../../../../general/stars%20and%20bars%20(combinatorics).md), where stars are the balls and bars are the walls in this case. <!--SR:!2025-09-16,260,330!2025-09-09,253,330-->
  - solution / generating function ::@:: For each variable, it can be any nonnegative. There are 4 variables. We can encode this into an ordinary generating function, using the power of $x$ as the sum: $$\sum_{k = 0}^\infty a_k x^k = A(x) = \left(\sum_{k = 0}^\infty x^k \right)^4 \,.$$ The coefficient (i.e. $a_{10}$) of the term $x^{10}$ is the answer we seek. Also note that the right hand side contains a series expansion for $1 / (1 - x)$. We can solve for the solution: $$\begin{aligned} & \phantom = \left[x^{10} \right] A(x) \\ & = \left[x^{10} \right] \left(\sum_{k = 0}^\infty x^k\right)^4 \\ & = \left[x^{10} \right] \frac 1 {(1 - x)^4} \\ & = \left[x^{10} \right] \sum_{k = 0}^\infty \binom {k + 3} k x^k \\ & = \binom {13} {10} = \frac {13!} {10! 3!} \,. \end{aligned}$$ This method easily yields the general formula: $$\left(\!\! \binom r n \!\!\right) = \binom {n + r - 1} n = \frac {(n + r - 1)!} {n! (r - 1)!} \,.$$  ($\left(\!\! \binom r n \!\!\right)$ is the multiset coefficient, representing the number of combinations to choose _n_ items from _r_ distinct items, repeats allowed.) <!--SR:!2025-09-21,217,270!2025-07-07,189,310-->

## binomial coefficient symmetry: double counting

Prove that {@{$$\binom n r = \binom n {n - r}$$, where $n \ge r$, using double counting}@}. <!--SR:!2025-09-17,261,330-->

- solution ::@:: For the left hand side, we are choosing _r_ people from _n_ people to be selected. For the right hand side, we are choosing _n_ − _r_ people from _n_ people to be NOT selected. Since they are counting the same thing, they are equal. <!--SR:!2025-09-10,254,330!2025-09-08,252,330-->
