---
aliases:
  - COMP 2711H question on 2024-09-09
  - COMP 2711H questions on 2024-09-09
  - COMP2711H question on 2024-09-09
  - COMP2711H questions on 2024-09-09
  - HKUST COMP 2711H question on 2024-09-09
  - HKUST COMP 2711H questions on 2024-09-09
  - HKUST COMP2711H question on 2024-09-09
  - HKUST COMP2711H questions on 2024-09-09
tags:
  - flashcard/active/special/academia/HKUST/COMP_2711H/questions/2024-09-09
  - language/in/English
---

# questions on 2024-09-09

- HKUST COMP 2711H

## lecture

### well-ordering principle to infinite descent with an additional assumption

Prove {{infinite descent from the well-ordering principle, with the additional assumption: the [trichotomy](law%20of%20trichotomy.md) axiom, which states $n \le m \equiv \lnot(m < n)$}}. <!--SR:!2024-10-14,4,270-->

- the additional assumption ::: The additional assumption is required for the well-ordering principle to imply infinite descent. In fact, the well-ordering principle is not equivalent to infinite descent (under the other Peano axioms). This common mistake is due to proofs assuming that if $n \le m$ then $\lnot(m < n)$, but this is not implied by the other Peano axioms except for the induction axiom, the thing that we are trying to prove. An example of this failing is the existence of a circular successor chain that satisfies all other Peano axioms. <!--SR:!2024-10-14,4,270!2024-10-14,4,270-->
- strategy ::: Prove by contradiction. Assume infinite descent fails by assuming there is an infinite sequence of strictly decreasing natural numbers, but the well-ordering principle holds. Note that the additional assumption is required. <!--SR:!2024-10-14,4,270!2024-10-14,4,270-->
- note<!-- flashcard a269c9d6-03a7-4078-bf84-f77eff89f94f --> ::: Induction and infinite descent are logically equivalent, so it is possible to prove one from the other. However, the well-ordering principle is implied by induction or infinite descent, but not the reverse, so is not equivalent (under the other Peano axioms). <!--SR:!2024-10-14,4,270!2024-10-14,4,270-->

1. assumption ::: Assume the well-ordering principle holds but not infinite descent. <!--SR:!2024-10-14,4,270!2024-10-14,4,270-->
2. construction ::: Let $a_1, a_2, \ldots$ be an infinite sequence of strictly decreasing natural numbers. Let $A$ be the set of natural numbers in the infinite sequence (which is nonempty). By the well-ordering principle, there is an least element $a_i$, which is also in the infinite sequence. Now consider the element $a_{i + 1}$. <!--SR:!2024-10-14,4,270!2024-10-14,4,270-->
3. conclusion ::: Now consider the element $a_{i + 1}$. Since $a_i$ is the least element of $A$ and $a_{i + 1}$ is in $A$, so $a_i \le a_{i + 1}$. By the trichotomy axiom (the additional assumption), this implies $a_{i + 1} < a_i$ is false. This means the sequence is not strictly decreasing from $a_i$ to $a_{i + 1}$. This is a contradiction. So the original assumption that infinite descent does not hold is false, so infinite descent holds if the well-ordering principle and the additional assumption hold. <!--SR:!2024-10-14,4,270!2024-10-14,4,270-->

### induction to well-ordering principle

Prove {{the well-ordering principle from induction}}. <!--SR:!2024-10-14,4,270-->

- strategy ::: Prove by contradiction. Assume induction holds, but the well-ordering principle fails by assuming there is an _nonempty_ set of natural numbers without a least element. <!--SR:!2024-10-14,4,270!2024-10-14,4,270-->
- note<!-- flashcard 6ba8c155-6f06-42cc-a831-59c4fa17a01f --> ::: Induction and infinite descent are logically equivalent, so it is possible to prove one from the other. However, the well-ordering principle is implied by induction or infinite descent, but not the reverse, so is not equivalent (under the other Peano axioms). <!--SR:!2024-10-14,4,270!2024-10-14,4,270-->

1. assumption ::: Assume induction holds but the well-ordering principle. Let $A$ be a _nonempty_ set of natural numbers without a least element. <!--SR:!2024-10-14,4,270!2024-10-14,4,270-->
2. construction ::: Consider the predicate $$P(n) := n \notin A$$, which states the natural number $n$ is not in $A$. We can prove the above predicate holds for all $n \in \mathbb N_0$ by (strong) induction. <!--SR:!2024-10-14,4,270!2024-10-14,4,270-->
3. base case ::: Consider $P(0)$. $0$ is the least element of all natural numbers (implied by induction), so if $0$ is in $A$, then it would be the least element of $A$. So $0$ must not be in $A$, hence $P(0)$ is true. <!--SR:!2024-10-14,4,270!2024-10-14,4,270-->
4. induction ::: Assume $P(m')$ holds if $m'$ is not larger than some natural number $m \in \mathbb N_0$, i.e. $(\forall m' \le m)(P(m'))$ is true. (This is the induction hypothesis of strong induction as opposed to ordinary induction.) Consider $P(S(m))$, which says $S(m) \notin A$. Consider if $S(m)$ is in $A$. Since all natural numbers less than or equal to $m$ are not in $A$ by the induction hypothesis, $S(m)$ would be the least element of $A$. So $S(m)$ must not be in $A$, hence $P(S(m))$ is true. <!--SR:!2024-10-14,4,270!2024-10-14,4,270-->
5. conclusion ::: By (strong) induction, we have proved that every natural number is not in $A$. So $A$ is _empty_. This contradicts that $A$ is _nonempty_. By contradiction, a _nonempty_ set of natural numbers without a least element does not exist, i.e., the well-ordering principle holds. <!--SR:!2024-10-14,4,270!2024-10-14,4,270-->

### Fibonacci number problems

The Fibonacci numbers are defined by: {{$$F_n = \begin{cases} 0, & n = 0 \\ 1, & n = 1 \\ F_{n - 1} + F_{n - 2} & n \ge 2 \end{cases}$$}}. <!--SR:!2024-10-14,4,270-->

- strategy ::: Apply induction on the structure of the Fibonacci numbers. The well-ordering principle may also be used. Sometimes, you can prove easily a new theorem from a proved theorem without using induction. <!--SR:!2024-10-14,4,270!2024-10-13,3,250-->

1. Prove the sum of Fibonacci numbers: $$\forall n \in \mathbb N_0 \qquad \sum_{i = 0}^n F_i = F_{n + 2} - 1$$ ::: Apply induction. <!--SR:!2024-10-14,4,270!2024-10-14,4,270-->
2. Prove the sum of odd Fibonacci numbers: $$\forall n \in \mathbb N_0 \qquad \sum_{i = 1}^n F_{2i - 1} = F_{2n}$$ ::: Apply induction. Or prove using the sum of even Fibonacci numbers (3). <!--SR:!2024-10-14,4,270!2024-10-14,4,270-->
3. Prove the sum of even Fibonacci numbers: $$\forall n \in \mathbb N_0 \qquad \sum_{i = 0}^n F_{2i} = F_{2n + 1} - 1$$ ::: Apply induction. Or prove using the sum of odd Fibonacci numbers (2). <!--SR:!2024-10-14,4,270!2024-10-14,4,270-->
4. Prove that consecutive Fibonacci numbers are relatively prime: $$\forall n \in \mathbb N_0 \qquad \gcd(F_n, F_{n + 1}) = 1$$ ::: Apply induction or the well-ordering principle. <!--SR:!2024-10-14,4,270!2024-10-14,4,270-->

### sum of sequence of cubes

Prove the sum of sequence of cubes: {{$$\forall n \in \mathbb N_0 \qquad \sum_{i = 0}^n i^3 = \left(\sum_{i = 0}^n i \right)^2 = \frac {n^2 (n + 1)^2} 4$$}}. <!--SR:!2024-10-13,3,250-->

- strategy ::: Apply induction. <!--SR:!2024-10-14,4,270!2024-10-14,4,270-->

### subset problems

A set $A$ is a subset of $B$ iff {{every element of $A$ is in $B$. In particular, the empty set $\varnothing$ and the set $B$ itself are both subsets of $B$}}. <!--SR:!2024-10-14,4,270-->

- strategy ::: Apply induction. For the induction set, consider the effect of adding a new element. <!--SR:!2024-10-14,4,270!2024-10-14,4,270-->

1. Prove a finite set of size $n$ has $2^n$ subsets. ::: Apply induction. For the induction step, consider NOT adding the new element to each of the subsets and adding the new element to each of the subsets. <!--SR:!2024-10-14,4,270!2024-10-14,4,270-->
2. Prove a finite set of size $n \ge 1$ has $2^{n - 1}$ even subsets (subsets with even number of elements) and $2^{n - 1}$ odd subsets (subsets with odd number of elements). ::: Apply induction. For the induction step, consider NOT adding the new element to each of the odd and even subsets, and adding the new element to each of the odd and even subsets. <!--SR:!2024-10-14,4,270!2024-10-14,4,270-->
3. We have a set of $n$ students $C$. How many ways can we choose $A^+ \subseteq A \subseteq C$? ::: There are $3^n$ ways of choosing. We can prove this using induction. For the induction step, consider the new student can have 3 possibilities: only in $C$, only in $A \subseteq C$, or in $A^+ \subseteq A \subseteq C$. <!--SR:!2024-10-14,4,270!2024-10-14,4,270-->

### Nim

Nim is {{a mathematical game of strategy in which two players take turns removing (or "nimming") objects from distinct heaps or piles}}. Consider Nim {{with two piles of $a$ objects and $b$ objects and two perfectly rational (tries to not lose) players}}. Prove that {{if $a = b$, then player 1 eventually cannot take any more objects and loses; and if $a \ne b$, then player 2 eventually cannot take any more objects and loses}}. <!--SR:!2024-10-14,4,270!2024-10-14,4,270!2024-10-14,4,270-->

- strategy ::: Apply (strong) induction. The induction is applied to the structure of Nim. The game state of Nim can be represented by a tuple of 2 numbers $(a, b)$. <!--SR:!2024-10-14,4,270!2024-10-14,4,270-->

1. If $a = b$, then player 1 eventually cannot take any more objects and loses. ::: Base case: If $(a, b) = (0, 0)$, player 1 cannot take any more objects. Induction step: Prove that $(a, b) = (n + 1, n + 1)$ must lead to a game state of $(a, b) = (m, m)$ where $m \le n$, and invoke the strong induction hypothesis. <!--SR:!2024-10-14,4,270!2024-10-14,4,270-->
2. If $a \ne b$, then player 2 eventually cannot take any more objects and loses. ::: Reuse the result when $a = b$. Show that if $a \ne b$, then player 1 can always turn it into a game state where $(a, b) = (n, n)$. Then this is equivalent to the result when $a = b$, except that player 1 and player 2 has swapped places. So player 2 cannot take any more objects and loses instead. <!--SR:!2024-10-14,4,270!2024-10-14,4,270-->

## tutorial

### weird problem

A prison guard assigns two natural number $n$ and $m$ to two prisoners $A$ and $B$, where $\lvert n − m \rvert = 1$. Everyday, they are brought to the same room and they can only shout out the answer (what $n$ and $m$ are). If the answer is correct, they are safe. Prove that $A$ and $B$ will always be safe.

---

What? Something is probably missing from this problem...

### average of neighbors

A 2D lattice is all points of form $(x, y)$ where $x, y \in \mathbb Z$. Every point has {{a natural number (easily generalizes to real number)}}. The number on each point is {{the average of its neighboring numbers}}. Prove that {{if the above requirements are satisfied, all the numbers are the same}}. <!--SR:!2024-10-14,4,270!2024-10-14,4,270!2024-10-14,4,270-->

- strategy ::: Apply the well-ordering principle (a kind of the extremal principle) and induction to "spread" the result. <!--SR:!2024-10-14,4,270!2024-10-14,4,270-->

1. base case ::: Let $A$ be the set of all natural numbers in the 2D lattice. The lattice is nonempty, so the set is nonempty. There is a minimum natural number by the well-ordering principle. Consider the point with the minimum natural number. <!--SR:!2024-10-14,4,270!2024-10-14,4,270-->
2. induction ::: Consider the point with the minimum natural number. Its neighbors cannot have a natural number lower than the minimum natural number, or otherwise the point we are considering does not have the minimum natural number. Then, the only way the point is the average of its neighbor numbers is if the neighbors all have the same natural number, which is also the minimum natural number. So its neighbors also have the minimum natural number. <!--SR:!2024-10-14,4,270!2024-10-14,4,270-->
3. conclusion ::: Since $(x, y) \in \mathbb Z^2$, so the lattice points are countably infinite (has a bijection with the natural numbers). Thus, we can apply regular (as opposed to transfinite) induction to prove every point in the lattice has the minimum natural number. So every point has the same natural number. <!--SR:!2024-10-14,4,270!2024-10-14,4,270-->

### circular cars

Suppose there are cars $\set{1, 2, 3, ..., n}$ ($n \ge 1$) parked around a circle. Let {{$x_i$ be the fuel of car $i$, $d_i$ be the distance of car $i$ to the next car (for the last car, the next car is the first car)}}. Also, {{$\sum_{i = 1}^n d_i \le \sum_{i = 1}^n x_i$ (the sum of fuels is not less than the sum of distances)}}. Prove that {{there exists a car $k$ such that if it starts going around the circle from where it was while all other cars remain still, and this moving car takes the fuel from other cars whenever it reaches them, car $k$ can eventually finish a cycle (reach its original point)}}. <!--SR:!2024-10-14,4,270!2024-10-14,4,270!2024-10-14,4,270-->

- strategy ::: Try to restate the problem to extract its mathematical structure. Apply induction. Think of how you can convert the case of $n + 1$ cars to $n$ cars. <!--SR:!2024-10-14,4,270!2024-10-14,4,270-->
- problem restatement ::: Make the cars into nodes. Each node $i$ has the tuple $(x_i, d_i)$. Let the initial state be $(x, d) = (0, 0)$. If we visit node $i$, we adds its tuple to the initial state. Prove that there is a starting node $k$ such that we can visit all nodes in order while never having a state such that $x < d$ (including the initial and final state)? <!--SR:!2024-10-14,4,270!2024-10-14,4,270-->

1. base case ::: Where there is 1 car, $\sum_{i = 1}^1 x_i \ge \sum_{i = 1}^1 d_i \implies x_1 \ge d_1$. So the car can travel back into itself. <!--SR:!2024-10-14,4,270!2024-10-14,4,270-->
2. induction / absorption ::: Assume the above statement is true for $n$ cars. Let there be $n + 1$ cars satisfying the above condition. Since $\sum_{i = 1}^{n + 1} x_i \ge \sum_{i = 1}^{n + 1} d_i$, there must be at least one tuple $(x_i, d_i)$ such that $x_i \ge d_i$. For convenience, shift the cars in a cycle such that said car is car $n + 1$, i.e. $x_{n + 1} \ge d_{n + 1}$. Now we absorb car $n + 1$ into the car 1 by adding its fuel and distance to car 1, i.e. $(x_1', d_1') = (x_1 + x_{n + 1}, d_1 + d_{n + 1})$. We will get a $n$-car cycle that still satisfies the above condition (the sum of fuel is not less than the sum of distances). <!--SR:!2024-10-14,4,270!2024-10-14,4,270-->
3. induction / construction ::: Now we have a $n$-car cycle that satisfies the above condition. So there is a car $k$ that can cycle around once without running out of fuel ($x \ge d$ in all states). Now we reconstruct the $n + 1$-car cycle from the $n$-car cycle. To do that, we need to split car 1 back into the original car 1 and car $n + 1$. We have two cases to consider: $1 < k \le n$ and $k = 1$. <!--SR:!2024-10-14,4,270!2024-10-14,4,270-->
4. induction / $1 < k \le n$ ::: Consider the path from car $k$ (inclusive) to car $n + 1$ (exclusive). Since the car tuples (for all $k \le i \le n$) are all the same, there is no difference in the resulting states for the $n$-car cycle and $n + 1$ car cycle up to this point. Now we are at car $n + 1$ (car 1 for $n$-car cycle). In the $n$-car cycle, we can go from car 1 to car 2. That is, given a state $s$ before visiting car 1, after adding $(x'_1, d'_1)$ to the state, the state $s' = s + (x'_1, d'_1)$ after visiting car 1 still satisfies $x \ge d$. In the $n + 1$ car cycle, we can go from car $n + 1$ to car 1 because $x_{n + 1} \ge d_{n + 1}$, so the resulting state $s'' = s + (x_{n + 1}, d_{n + 1})$ satisfies $x \ge d$. Then we can go from car 1 to car 2, because the resulting state $s'' + (x_1, d_1) = s + (x_{n + 1}, d_{n + 1}) + (x_1, d_1) = s + (x'_1, d'_1) = s'$ is same as the state after visiting car 1 in the $n$-car cycle, so it satisfies $x \ge d$. Then the rest of the path from car 2 (inclusive) to car $k$ (exclusive) produces the same states, because from this point on, the car tuples are the same as that in the $n$-cycle. This completes the induction for this case. <!--SR:!2024-10-13,3,250!2024-10-14,4,270-->
5. induction / $k = 1$ ::: In the $n$-car cycle, the state changes this way after starting at car 1: $(0, 0) \mapsto (x'_i, d'_i)$. In the $n + 1$-car cycle, we can start at car $n + 1$, changing the state this way: $(0, 0) \mapsto (x_{n + 1}, d_{n + 1})$. This satisfies $x \ge d$ because $x_{n + 1} \ge d_{n + 1}$. Then move from car $n + 1$ to car 1: $(x_{n + 1}, d_{n + 1}) \mapsto (x_{n + 1} + x_1, d_{n + 1} + d_1) = (x'_1, d'_1)$. This is the same state as that in the $n$-car cycle, so this also satisfies $x \ge d$. Then the rest of the path from car 2 (inclusive) to the starting car (exclusive) is the same for both $n$-car cycle and $n + 1$-car cycle, as the car tuples are the same. This completes the induction for this case. <!--SR:!2024-10-14,4,270!2024-10-14,4,270-->
6. conclusion ::: By induction, this proves the above statement for all natural numbers $n \ge 1$. <!--SR:!2024-10-14,4,270!2024-10-14,4,270-->

### Diophantine equation: factor of 3

There are no four positive integers $x, y, z, u \in \mathbb N_{\ge 1}$ such that {{$x^2 + y^2 = 3(z^2 + u^2)$}}. <!--SR:!2024-10-14,4,270-->

- strategy ::: When you see such equations, it almost always uses the well-ordering principle. Start by asserting the existence of minimal example (for example, $x$ is minimal), and then construct an even smaller example (for example, we construct a solution with a smaller $x$). Then we will have proved the above by contradiction. <!--SR:!2024-10-14,4,270!2024-10-14,4,270-->

1. assumption ::: Assume there are solutions for this equation. Then there is a solution $(x, y, z, u)$ such that $x$ is minimal by the well-ordering principle. <!--SR:!2024-10-14,4,270!2024-10-14,4,270-->
2. construction ::: Consider squares of numbers modulus 3: $$\begin{aligned} 0^2 & \equiv 0 \pmod 3 \\ 1^2 & \equiv 1 \pmod 3 \\ 2^2 & \equiv 1 \pmod 3 \end{aligned}$$. From above, $x$ and $y$ must be both divisible by 3, or otherwise sum of their squares $x^2 + y^2$ is not divisible by 3. Perform algebraic manipulations: $$\begin{aligned} x^2 + y^2 & = 3(z^2 + u^2) \\ (3x')^2 + (3y')^2 & = 3(z^2 + u^2) && x := 3x', y := 3y' \\ 9x'^2 + 9y'^2 & = 3(z^2 + u^2) \\ z^2 + u^2 & = 3(x'^2 + y'^2) \end{aligned}$$. Repeat the above algebraic manipulation again to get $$x'^2 + y'^2 = 3(z'^2 + u'^2) \qquad z := 3z', u := 3u'$$. We have constructed another solution $(x', y', z', u')$, with $x' < x$ because $3x' = x$. <!--SR:!2024-10-14,4,270!2024-10-14,4,270-->
3. conclusion ::: Since we have constructed a solution $(x', y', z', u')$ with $x' < x$, so $x$ is not minimal. This contradicts with the assumption of $x$ being minimal. By contradiction, there are no solution to the above equations. <!--SR:!2024-10-14,4,270!2024-10-14,4,270-->

### graph theory: central city

We have a country with $n \ge 1$ cities. There is {{exactly one road between any two cities. All the roads are one-way}}. A city $c$ is central if {{every other city $c′$ can either directly reach $c$ or with 1 stop}}. Prove that {{there is alway at least one central city}}. <!--SR:!2024-10-14,4,270!2024-10-14,4,270!2024-10-14,4,270-->

- strategy ::: We can use either induction or the well-ordering principle (a kind of the extremal principle). <!--SR:!2024-10-14,4,270!2024-10-14,4,270-->

- induction
  1. induction / base case ::: We have 1 city. The city is central because there are no other cities. <!--SR:!2024-10-14,4,270!2024-10-14,4,270-->
  2. induction / induction ::: Assume there is a central city $c$ in $n$ cities. There are 3 kinds of cities in the $n$ cities: city $c$, cities that points to $c$, and cities that points to $c$ with 1 stop. Consider adding an extra city $c'$. If $c'$ points to $c$, then $c$ is still central. So now consider $c$ points to $c'$ instead. If there is a city that points to $c$ which is pointed by $c'$, then $c$ is still central, as $c'$ points to $c$ with 1 stop. So now consider there are no cities that points to $c$ which is pointed by $c'$. This means they all point to $c'$ instead. Then, then $c'$ becomes central, because: $c$ and cities that point to $c$ point to $c'$, and cities that point to $c$ with 1 stop either points to $c'$, or points to $c'$ with 1 stop via a city that points to $c$, because all cities that point to $c$ also points to $c'$. By induction, there is at least 1 central city in $n \ge 1$ cities. <!--SR:!2024-10-14,4,270!2024-10-14,4,270-->
- well-ordering principle
  1. well-ordering principle / construction ::: Consider $n \ge 1$ cities. There is a city $c$ with maximal in-degree $d$ (most cities pointing to $c$) by the well-ordering principle (the extremal principle). We will show that $c$ must be a central city by contradiction. <!--SR:!2024-10-14,4,270!2024-10-14,4,270-->
  2. well-ordering principle / contradiction ::: Assume there is a city $c$ with maximal in-degree $d$ that is NOT a central city. Either, there is only 1 city $c$, which trivially contradicts, or there is another city $c'$ that does not point to $c$ directly or with 1 stop. Consider that other city $c'$. $c'$ cannot point to $c$ or the $d$ cities that point to $c$ (there are $d$ of them, as the in-degree of $c$ is $d$). So $c$ and the $d$ cities that point to $c$ must point to $c'$ instead. But then the in-degree of $c'$ is $1 + d$, so $c$ does not have the maximal in-degree. This is a contradiction. So $c$ must be a central city. <!--SR:!2024-10-14,4,270!2024-10-14,4,270-->
