---
aliases:
  - COMP 2711H question on 2024-09-25
  - COMP 2711H questions on 2024-09-25
  - COMP2711H question on 2024-09-25
  - COMP2711H questions on 2024-09-25
  - HKUST COMP 2711H question on 2024-09-25
  - HKUST COMP 2711H questions on 2024-09-25
  - HKUST COMP2711H question on 2024-09-25
  - HKUST COMP2711H questions on 2024-09-25
tags:
  - flashcard/active/special/academia/HKUST/COMP_2711H/questions/2024-09-25
  - language/in/English
---

# questions on 2024-09-25

- HKUST COMP 2711H

## distance between points in a square

If we choose 10 points {@{in a 3-by-3 square, there are 2 of them with a distance not exceeding $\sqrt 2$}@}. <!--SR:!2025-09-29,266,330-->

- strategy ::@:: Identify the holes. In this case, the holes are splitting up the 3-by-3 square into 9 1-by-1 squares. <!--SR:!2025-10-13,277,330!2025-10-21,282,330-->
  - strategy / side channels ::@:: Notice the relations between numbers. The numbers relevant are: 10 points, 3-by-3 square has an area of 9. <!--SR:!2025-10-01,268,330!2025-09-30,267,330-->

## handshakes in a party

Let _n_ ≥ 2 people attend a party. Each person has shake hands with some other people. Show that {@{the number obtained from summing up the number of handshakes with other people for each person in the party, is even}@}. Then, show that {@{there are 2 people with the same number of handshakes with other people}@}. <!--SR:!2025-10-28,290,330!2025-10-09,274,330-->

- strategy
  - strategy / even total handshakes ::@:: It is very easy to show that the number obtained from summing up the number of handshakes with other people for each person in the party is even. Just consider adding the effect of adding a handshake. <!--SR:!2025-10-13,277,330!2025-10-11,276,330-->
  - strategy ::@:: For the number of handshakes with other people, the holes are the possible number of handshakes with other people, but notice that two numbers of handshakes are exclusive... <p> Alternatively, use the extremal principle to assert the existence of a person with the maximum number of handshakes. The holes are still the number of handshakes. <!--SR:!2025-08-04,205,310!2025-10-10,275,330-->

## divisibility and modular arithmetic

Prove that there exists $x, y \in \mathbb N$ such that {@{$2024 \mid (9^x - 9^y)$}@}. <!--SR:!2025-10-19,280,330-->

- strategy ::@:: First, convert the problem into a form using modular arithmetic: There exists $x, y \in \mathbb N$ such that $9^x \equiv 9^y \pmod {2024}$. Then realize that since $\gcd(9, 2024) = 1$, so $9^n \pmod {2024}$ will loop through all possible values from 0 to 2023 as _n_ increases. The holes are the 2024 possible natural numbers modulus 2024. <!--SR:!2025-10-20,281,330!2025-10-07,272,330-->

## sum of columns, rows, and diagonals

There is a 3-by-3 grid. Each cell may be -1, 0, or 1. Is it possible to {@{make sure every column, row, and diagonal has a different sum}@}? <!--SR:!2025-10-17,281,330-->

- strategy ::@:: The holes are the possible sums: -3 to 3, which are 7 holes. The pigeons are the number of columns, rows, and diagonals, which is 8. <!--SR:!2025-10-05,271,330!2025-10-15,279,330-->

## divisibility, modular arithmetic, and subset

Let _X_ be a set of _n_ integers. Prove that {@{there exists a nonempty subset $Y \subseteq X$ such that $n \mid \sum_{y \in Y} y$}@}. <!--SR:!2025-07-22,196,310-->

- strategy ::@:: First, convert the problem into a form using modular arithmetic: There exists a nonempty subset $Y \subseteq X$ such that $\sum_{y \in Y} y \equiv 0 \pmod n$. <p> However, the above is insufficient to find the pigeons. Instead, we must consider two subsets $Z \subseteq Y \subseteq X$ together in the following relationship: $$\sum_{y \in Y} y \equiv \sum_{z \in Z} z \pmod n\,.$$ Then realize that $\sum_{a \in Y \setminus Z} a \equiv 0 \pmod n$. The pigeons are then the $Z, Y$, which is the following set of _n_ + 1 sets: $$\set{\set{}, \set{x_1}, \set{x_1, x_2}, \ldots, \set{x_1, x_2, \ldots, x_n} }\,.$$ The holes are simply the natural numbers modulus _n_, which are _n_ holes. <!--SR:!2025-10-18,246,290!2025-08-09,210,310-->

## sum of subsets

Let $X \subseteq \set{1, 2, \ldots, 99}$ and |_X_| = 10. Show that {@{there are two disjoint nonempty subsets of _X_ with the same sum}@}. <!--SR:!2025-10-23,284,330-->

- strategy ::@:: The holes are the possible sums, 1 to 855. The pigeons are elements of the power set of _X_, which have 2<sup>10</sup> = 1024 elements. <!--SR:!2025-10-29,290,330!2025-10-10,275,330-->

## 15 people having 100 coins

15 people have 100 coins. Show that {@{there are two people with the same number of coins}@}. <!--SR:!2025-10-04,270,330-->

- strategy ::@:: Reverse the pigeonhole principle. Think of ways to "disprove" the above statement by not satisfying the pigeonhole principle, such as everyone having different number of coins. Then one would find this requires at least 105 coins: $$0 + 1 + \cdots + 14 = 105\,.$$ <!--SR:!2025-09-25,262,330!2025-10-26,288,330-->

## consecutive games and goals

A football plays 20 games and scores in all of them, totaling 30 goals. Prove that {@{there is a sequence of consecutive games in which the team scored exactly 9 goals}@}. <!--SR:!2025-10-27,289,330-->

- strategy ::@:: The pigeons and holes are very difficult to find. <p> Consider the cumulative score. After each game, the cumulative score must increase by at least 1. There are 20 cumulative scores, after each of the 20 games. To get more pigeons, for each of the 20 cumulative score, add a number that is the cumulative score plus 9. <p> The holes are the possible numbers. The possible numbers range from 1 to 39, which have 39 holes. But we have 40 numbers, which are the pigeons. Two of them must be the same. <p> Now, think of the relations between the 40 numbers, and prove that the existence of two same numbers in the 40 numbers implies the existence of two cumulative scores differing by 9. <!--SR:!2026-12-15,599,330!2025-07-03,72,290-->
  - strategy / side channels ::@:: Kind of difficult. But try to add up numbers of the same type, such the goals. In this instance, 30 + 9 = 39 goals, which is 1 less than 40. 40 is twice the number of games. <!--SR:!2025-10-16,280,330!2025-10-01,268,330-->

## sum of two numbers in a subset

Let $X \subseteq \set{1, 2, \ldots, 100}$ and |_X_| = 16. Prove that {@{there exist 4 different numbers $a, b, c, d \in X$ such that $a + b = c + d$}@}. <!--SR:!2025-10-02,268,330-->

- strategy ::@:: Sometimes, estimate the number of holes you needed by finding the pigeons first. In this case, there are $\binom {16} 2 = 120$ pairs of numbers. So we need the number of holes to be less than 120. <p> The possible sums of two numbers are too many holes, but the possible differences of two numbers, after changing the equation to $$a - c = b - d$$ are not too many holes. <p> Now, there is a problem: the two pairs of numbers (the pigeons), after imposing an order $a > c \ge b > d$, may have $c = b$, which is not allowed. In general, what we can do is to remove the pigeons such that the above will not happen, and hope that there are still enough pigeons. In this case, we derive an algorithm to remove the pigeons, and show that the algorithm must not remove too many pigeons. The algorithm depends on if $c = b$, then $c = b$ is the average of $a$ and $b$ because $a - c = b - d$. <!--SR:!2025-10-03,233,290!2026-05-14,379,290-->

## pigeonhole principle and graph theory

There are 6 candidates for president. Every pair of candidates is either friends or enemies. Prove that {@{there are either 3 candidates who are all friends with each other or 3 candidates who are all enemies with each other}@}. <!--SR:!2025-10-22,283,330-->

17 people correspond by mail with one another, each one with all the rest. In their letters, only 3 different topics are discussed. Each pair of correspondents deals with only one of these topics. Prove that {@{there are at least 3 people who write to each other about the same topic}@}. <!--SR:!2025-10-25,287,330-->

- strategy
  - strategy / candidates for president ::@:: Consider a candidate. The pigeons are the relations with the 5 other candidates. The holes are the 2 possible relations the candidate can have. By the pigeonhole principle, we can show that there must be a relationship (friend or enemy) that applies to at least 3 other candidates. <p> Then consider the relationships between those 3 candidates. <!--SR:!2025-10-12,276,330!2025-10-06,272,330-->
  - strategy / correspondence by mail ::@:: Consider a person. The pigeons are the topics with the 16 other people. The holes are the 3 possible topics. By the pigeonhole principle, we can show that there must be a topic that applies to at least 6 other people. <p> Then consider the 6 other people. One would realize, mathematically, this is the same as the last question. The 6 other people are restricted to 2 other topics because having that 1 topic would result in proving the problem statement. <p> In general, one can extrapolate this to any number of topics/relationships. In even more general terms, a problem can be broken down into smaller copies of the same problem. <!--SR:!2025-10-03,269,330!2025-10-14,278,330-->
  - strategy / side channels ::@:: Sometimes, one may be able to detect the use of pigeonholes by dividing numbers in the problem statement... <!--SR:!2025-07-14,189,310!2025-10-08,273,330-->
