---
aliases:
  - COMP 2711H question on 2024-10-09
  - COMP 2711H questions on 2024-10-09
  - COMP2711H question on 2024-10-09
  - COMP2711H questions on 2024-10-09
  - HKUST COMP 2711H question on 2024-10-09
  - HKUST COMP 2711H questions on 2024-10-09
  - HKUST COMP2711H question on 2024-10-09
  - HKUST COMP2711H questions on 2024-10-09
tags:
  - flashcard/active/special/academia/HKUST/COMP_2711H/questions/2024-10-09
  - language/in/English
---

# questions on 2024-10-09

- HKUST COMP 2711H

## lengths of shortest paths

Design an algorithm to {@{find the distances from a vertex to all other vertices on a graph}@}. Try to do the same for weighted graphs. <!--SR:!2025-11-29,312,330-->

- solution
  - solution / search ::@:: Apply breadth-first search and mark down the distances from the root. <!--SR:!2028-03-06,922,310!2025-11-30,313,330-->
    - solution / search / weighted graph ::@:: Dijkstra's algorithm is a generalization of breadth-first search, which can be applied for this problem but on weighted graphs. <!--SR:!2027-09-18,811,330!2026-12-28,575,310-->
  - solution / recursion ::@:: Define a function $\alpha(u, v, k)$ which returns 1 if there is a walk from _u_ to _v_ with _k_ edges, and 0 otherwise. We can define this function recursively using a vertex's neighbors and with base cases. Then the distance from an vertex _u_ to any other vertex _v_ is the minimum _k_ such that $\alpha(u, v, k) = 1$. <!--SR:!2029-10-05,1408,350!2025-11-28,311,330-->
    - solution / recursion / weighted graph ::@:: This idea can be generalized to weighted graphs if $\alpha(u, v, k)$ returns the actual distance or infinity ∞ if such a walk is impossible. Changing the recurrence relations and base cases should work. <!--SR:!2027-09-25,818,330!2028-03-31,945,330-->
    - solution / recursion / adjacency matrices ::@:: Both of above cases can also be represented using adjacency matrices and repeated multiplication. <p> Note that repeated multiplication of matrices (or anything that has sensible repeated multiplication) can be speeded up. An example: To calculate A<sup>8</sup>, we do not need to multiply A itself 8 times (7 multiplications). Instead, find AA = A<sup>2</sup>, then find A<sup>2</sup>A<sup>2</sup> = A<sup>4</sup>, then find A<sup>4</sup>A<sup>4</sup> = A<sup>8</sup>, which only requires 3 multiplications. In general, we can have a linear combination of the above cached results to find A<sup>_n_</sup> in O(log(_n_)) multiplications instead. <!--SR:!2026-01-24,345,310!2025-12-01,314,330-->
