---
aliases:
  - COMP 2711H question on 2024-09-09 tutorial
  - COMP 2711H questions on 2024-09-09 tutorial
  - COMP2711H question on 2024-09-09 tutorial
  - COMP2711H questions on 2024-09-09 tutorial
  - HKUST COMP 2711H question on 2024-09-09 tutorial
  - HKUST COMP 2711H questions on 2024-09-09 tutorial
  - HKUST COMP2711H question on 2024-09-09 tutorial
  - HKUST COMP2711H questions on 2024-09-09 tutorial
tags:
  - flashcard/active/special/academia/HKUST/COMP_2711H/questions/2024-09-09/tutorial
  - language/in/English
---

# questions on 2024-09-09 tutorial

- HKUST COMP 2711H

## weird problem

A prison guard assigns two natural number $n$ and $m$ to two prisoners $A$ and $B$, where $\lvert n − m \rvert = 1$. Everyday, they are brought to the same room and they can only shout out the answer (what $n$ and $m$ are). If the answer is correct, they are safe. Prove that $A$ and $B$ will always be safe.

---

What? Something is probably missing from this problem...

## average of neighbors

A 2D lattice is all points of form $(x, y)$ where $x, y \in \mathbb Z$. Every point has {@{a natural number (easily generalizes to real number)}@}. The number on each point is {@{the average of its neighboring numbers}@}. Prove that {@{if the above requirements are satisfied, all the numbers are the same}@}. <!--SR:!2028-12-20,1190,350!2028-12-30,1199,350!2028-11-25,1170,350-->

- strategy ::@:: Apply the well-ordering principle (a kind of the extremal principle) and induction to "spread" the result. <!--SR:!2028-12-25,1194,350!2028-12-11,1183,350-->

1. base case ::@:: Let $A$ be the set of all natural numbers in the 2D lattice. The lattice is nonempty, so the set is nonempty. There is a minimum natural number by the well-ordering principle. Consider the point with the minimum natural number. <!--SR:!2028-12-06,1179,350!2028-11-08,1155,350-->
2. induction ::@:: Consider the point with the minimum natural number. Its neighbors cannot have a natural number lower than the minimum natural number, or otherwise the point we are considering does not have the minimum natural number. Then, the only way the point is the average of its neighbor numbers is if the neighbors all have the same natural number, which is also the minimum natural number. So its neighbors also have the minimum natural number. <!--SR:!2026-09-04,504,310!2028-11-21,1167,350-->
3. conclusion ::@:: Since $(x, y) \in \mathbb Z^2$, so the lattice points are countably infinite (has a bijection with the natural numbers). Thus, we can apply regular (as opposed to transfinite) induction to prove every point in the lattice has the minimum natural number. So every point has the same natural number. <!--SR:!2028-12-05,1178,350!2028-12-13,1185,350-->

## circular cars

Suppose there are cars $\set{1, 2, 3, ..., n}$ ($n \ge 1$) parked around a circle. Let {@{$x_i$ be the fuel of car $i$, $d_i$ be the distance of car $i$ to the next car (for the last car, the next car is the first car)}@}. Also, {@{$\sum_{i = 1}^n d_i \le \sum_{i = 1}^n x_i$ (the sum of fuels is not less than the sum of distances)}@}. Prove that {@{there exists a car $k$ such that if it starts going around the circle from where it was while all other cars remain still, and this moving car takes the fuel from other cars whenever it reaches them, car $k$ can eventually finish a cycle (reach its original point)}@}. <!--SR:!2028-11-09,1156,350!2028-11-16,1163,350!2027-07-17,759,330-->

- strategy ::@:: Try to restate the problem to extract its mathematical structure. Apply induction. Think of how you can convert the case of $n + 1$ cars to $n$ cars. <!--SR:!2027-09-03,793,330!2028-12-16,1187,350-->
- problem restatement ::@:: Make the cars into nodes. Each node $i$ has the tuple $(x_i, d_i)$. Let the initial state be $(x, d) = (0, 0)$. If we visit node $i$, we adds its tuple to the initial state. Prove that there is a starting node $k$ such that we can visit all nodes in order while never having a state such that $x < d$ (including the initial and final state)? <!--SR:!2028-11-05,1153,350!2028-12-25,1195,350-->

1. base case ::@:: Where there is 1 car, $\sum_{i = 1}^1 x_i \ge \sum_{i = 1}^1 d_i \implies x_1 \ge d_1$. So the car can travel back into itself. <!--SR:!2028-11-19,1165,350!2028-11-01,1149,350-->
2. induction / absorption ::@:: Assume the above statement is true for $n$ cars. Let there be $n + 1$ cars satisfying the above condition. Since $\sum_{i = 1}^{n + 1} x_i \ge \sum_{i = 1}^{n + 1} d_i$, there must be at least one tuple $(x_i, d_i)$ such that $x_i \ge d_i$. For convenience, shift the cars in a cycle such that said car is car $n + 1$, i.e. $x_{n + 1} \ge d_{n + 1}$. Now we absorb car $n + 1$ into the car 1 by adding its fuel and distance to car 1, i.e. $(x_1', d_1') = (x_1 + x_{n + 1}, d_1 + d_{n + 1})$. We will get a $n$-car cycle that still satisfies the above condition (the sum of fuel is not less than the sum of distances). <!--SR:!2027-09-01,791,330!2027-12-23,836,330-->
3. induction / construction ::@:: Now we have a $n$-car cycle that satisfies the above condition. So there is a car $k$ that can cycle around once without running out of fuel ($x \ge d$ in all states). Now we reconstruct the $n + 1$-car cycle from the $n$-car cycle. To do that, we need to split car 1 back into the original car 1 and car $n + 1$. We have two cases to consider: $1 < k \le n$ and $k = 1$. <!--SR:!2026-09-15,511,310!2027-09-25,810,330-->
4. induction / $1 < k \le n$ ::@:: Consider the path from car $k$ (inclusive) to car $n + 1$ (exclusive). Since the car tuples (for all $k \le i \le n$) are all the same, there is no difference in the resulting states for the $n$-car cycle and $n + 1$ car cycle up to this point. Now we are at car $n + 1$ (merged into car 1 for $n$-car cycle). In the $n$-car cycle, we can go from car 1 to car 2. That is, given a state $s$ before visiting car 1, after adding $(x'_1, d'_1)$ to the state, the state $s' = s + (x'_1, d'_1)$ after visiting car 1 still satisfies $x \ge d$. In the $n + 1$ car cycle, we can go from car $n + 1$ to car 1 because $x_{n + 1} \ge d_{n + 1}$, so the resulting state $s'' = s + (x_{n + 1}, d_{n + 1})$ satisfies $x \ge d$. Then we can go from car 1 to car 2, because the resulting state $s'' + (x_1, d_1) = s + (x_{n + 1}, d_{n + 1}) + (x_1, d_1) = s + (x'_1, d'_1) = s'$ is same as the state after visiting car 1 in the $n$-car cycle, so it satisfies $x \ge d$. Then the rest of the path from car 2 (inclusive) to car $k$ (exclusive) produces the same states, because from this point on, the car tuples are the same as that in the $n$-cycle. This completes the induction for this case. <!--SR:!2026-04-17,320,250!2026-09-19,515,310-->
5. induction / $k = 1$ ::@:: In the $n$-car cycle, the state changes this way after starting at car 1: $(0, 0) \mapsto (x'_i, d'_i)$. In the $n + 1$-car cycle, we can start at car $n + 1$, changing the state this way: $(0, 0) \mapsto (x_{n + 1}, d_{n + 1})$. This satisfies $x \ge d$ because $x_{n + 1} \ge d_{n + 1}$. Then move from car $n + 1$ to car 1: $(x_{n + 1}, d_{n + 1}) \mapsto (x_{n + 1} + x_1, d_{n + 1} + d_1) = (x'_1, d'_1)$. This is the same state as that in the $n$-car cycle, so this also satisfies $x \ge d$. Then the rest of the path from car 2 (inclusive) to the starting car (exclusive) is the same for both $n$-car cycle and $n + 1$-car cycle, as the car tuples are the same. This completes the induction for this case. <!--SR:!2027-09-21,808,330!2026-09-30,525,310-->
6. conclusion ::@:: By induction, this proves the above statement for all natural numbers $n \ge 1$. <!--SR:!2028-10-30,1148,350!2028-11-20,1166,350-->

## Diophantine equation: factor of 3

There are no four positive integers $x, y, z, u \in \mathbb N_{\ge 1}$ such that {@{$x^2 + y^2 = 3(z^2 + u^2)$}@}. <!--SR:!2028-11-27,1172,350-->

- strategy ::@:: When you see such equations, it almost always uses the well-ordering principle. Start by asserting the existence of minimal example (for example, $x$ is minimal), and then construct an even smaller example (for example, we construct a solution with a smaller $x$). Then we will have proved the above by contradiction. <!--SR:!2028-10-31,1148,350!2028-10-27,1145,350-->

1. assumption ::@:: Assume there are solutions for this equation. Then there is a solution $(x, y, z, u)$ such that $x$ is minimal by the well-ordering principle. <!--SR:!2028-12-02,1176,350!2028-11-26,1171,350-->
2. construction ::@:: Consider squares of numbers modulus 3 (also see [_quadratic residue_](../../../../../general/quadratic%20residue.md)): $$\begin{aligned} 0^2 & \equiv 0 \pmod 3 \\ 1^2 & \equiv 1 \pmod 3 \\ 2^2 & \equiv 1 \pmod 3 \end{aligned}$$. From above, $x$ and $y$ must be both divisible by 3, or otherwise sum of their squares $x^2 + y^2$ is not divisible by 3. Perform algebraic manipulations: $$\begin{aligned} x^2 + y^2 & = 3(z^2 + u^2) \\ (3x')^2 + (3y')^2 & = 3(z^2 + u^2) && x := 3x', y := 3y' \\ 9x'^2 + 9y'^2 & = 3(z^2 + u^2) \\ z^2 + u^2 & = 3(x'^2 + y'^2) \end{aligned}$$. Repeat the above algebraic manipulation again to get $$x'^2 + y'^2 = 3(z'^2 + u'^2) \qquad z := 3z', u := 3u'$$. We have constructed another solution $(x', y', z', u')$, with $x' < x$ because $3x' = x$. <!--SR:!2027-10-07,816,330!2026-05-16,387,290-->
3. conclusion ::@:: Since we have constructed a solution $(x', y', z', u')$ with $x' < x$, so $x$ is not minimal. This contradicts with the assumption of $x$ being minimal. By contradiction, there are no solutions to the above equations. <!--SR:!2027-09-17,805,330!2028-12-04,1177,350-->

## graph theory: central city

We have a country with $n \ge 1$ cities. There is {@{exactly one one-way road between any two cities}@}. A city $c$ is central if {@{every other city $c′$ can either directly reach $c$ or with 1 stop}@}. Prove that {@{there is alway at least one central city}@}. <!--SR:!2028-02-05,869,330!2029-01-05,1204,350!2028-12-17,1188,350-->

- strategy ::@:: We can use either induction or the well-ordering principle (a kind of the extremal principle). <!--SR:!2028-12-12,1184,350!2028-12-26,1195,350-->

<!-- list separator -->

- induction
  1. induction / base case ::@:: We have 1 city. The city is central because there are no other cities. <!--SR:!2028-12-24,1194,350!2028-11-25,1169,350-->
  2. induction / induction ::@:: Assume there is a central city $c$ in $n$ cities. There are 3 kinds of cities in the $n$ cities: city $c$, cities that points to $c$, and cities that points to $c$ with 1 stop. Consider adding an extra city $c'$. If $c'$ points to $c$, then $c$ is still central. So now consider $c$ points to $c'$ instead. If there is a city that points to $c$ which is pointed by $c'$, then $c$ is still central, as $c'$ points to $c$ with 1 stop. So now consider there are no cities that points to $c$ which is pointed by $c'$. This means they all point to $c'$ instead. Then, then $c'$ becomes central, because: $c$ and cities that point to $c$ point to $c'$, and cities that point to $c$ with 1 stop either points to $c'$, or points to $c'$ with 1 stop via a city that points to $c$, because all cities that point to $c$ also points to $c'$. By induction, there is at least 1 central city in $n \ge 1$ cities. <!--SR:!2027-10-08,817,330!2027-09-04,793,330-->
- well-ordering principle
  1. well-ordering principle / construction ::@:: Consider $n \ge 1$ cities. There is a city $c$ with maximal in-degree $d$ (most cities pointing to $c$) by the well-ordering principle (the extremal principle). We will show that $c$ must be a central city by contradiction. <!--SR:!2028-12-18,1189,350!2027-08-31,790,330-->
  2. well-ordering principle / contradiction ::@:: Assume there is a city $c$ with maximal in-degree $d$ that is NOT a central city. Either, there is only 1 city $c$, which trivially contradicts, or there is another city $c'$ that does not point to $c$ directly or with 1 stop. Consider that other city $c'$. $c'$ cannot point to $c$ or the $d$ cities that point to $c$ (there are $d$ of them, as the in-degree of $c$ is $d$). So $c$ and the $d$ cities that point to $c$ must point to $c'$ instead. But then the in-degree of $c'$ is $1 + d$, so $c$ does not have the maximal in-degree. This is a contradiction. So $c$ must be a central city. <!--SR:!2027-08-18,779,330!2027-07-09,751,330-->
