---
aliases:
  - HKUST PHYS 1314
  - HKUST PHYS 1314 index
  - HKUST PHYS1314
  - HKUST PHYS1314 index
  - Honors General Physics II
  - Honors General Physics II index
  - PHYS 1314
  - PHYS 1314 index
  - PHYS1314
  - PHYS1314 index
tags:
  - flashcard/active/special/academia/HKUST/PHYS_1314/index
  - function/index
  - language/in/English
---

# index

- HKUST PHYS 1314
- name: Honors General Physics II

The content is in teaching order.

- grading
  - scheme
    - homework: 0.15
    - midterm exam: 0.35
    - final exam: 0.5
- logistics

## children

- [assignments](assignments/)
- [questions](questions.md)

## assessments

## week 1 lecture

- datetime: 2025-02-03T09:00:00+08:00/2025-02-03T10:20:00+08:00
- topic: introduction, electric charge and electric field
- course logistics
- [electric charge](../../../../general/electric%20charge.md) ::@:: positive/negative <br/> transferrable, via _electric current_ <br/> quantized, in multiples of the _elementary charge_ _e_ ≈ 1.602×10<sup>−19</sup>&nbsp;C <!--SR:!2025-07-22,120,290!2025-07-24,122,290-->
- [electroscope](../../../../general/electroscope.md) ::@:: It consists of a thin metal strip that is attached to a metallic rod. The metallic rod is contained in a glass window box and is electrically isolated from the supporting table. <!--SR:!2025-04-07,47,290!2025-07-23,121,290-->
  - electroscope / experiment ::@:: charged: Touching/almost touching it with a (positively or negatively) charged object, the metal strip deflects. <br/> uncharged: Grounding it with a metallic object, the metal strip is restored. <p> If the charged object touches it, charges are transferred to the metal strip, and like charges in the metal strip repel each other. Separately, the metal strip still deflects even if the charged object only almost touches it because this action can _induce_ electric charges. <!--SR:!2025-03-26,38,290!2025-06-17,87,270-->
- [Van de Graaff generator](../../../../general/Van%20de%20Graaff%20generator.md) ::@:: It uses the friction between a revolving belt and a pick-up brush to accumulate a net electric charge on the metal sphere. <!--SR:!2025-04-24,61,310!2025-04-08,45,290-->
  - Van de Graaff generator / experiment ::@:: When we place another metal sphere, grounded to the ground, next to the metal sphere of a running Van de Graaff generator, we can see periodic sparks between the two metal spheres and hear sounds. <p> Electric charges are flowing from the Van de Graaff generator to the other metal sphere through the air, which ionizes the air. This phenomenon is called _lightning_. <!--SR:!2025-05-01,67,310!2025-04-12,48,290-->
- [superposition principle](../../../../general/superposition%20principle.md) ::@:: It states that, for all linear systems, the net response caused by two or more stimuli is the sum of the responses that would have been caused by each stimulus individually. <!--SR:!2025-04-26,63,310!2025-04-18,55,310-->
  - superposition principle / total charge of a system ::@:: The total charge of a system is the summation of all individual charges. <!--SR:!2025-04-30,66,310!2025-04-21,58,310-->
  - superposition principle / electrostatic force ::@:: The electrostatic force on a test charge by a collection of charged objects is the vector sum over the electrostatic forces on the test charge by each charged object. <!--SR:!2025-04-06,46,290!2025-04-06,43,290-->
- [charge conservation](../../../../general/charge%20conservation.md) ::@:: In an _isolated_ (less accurately, _closed_) system the sum of positive and negative charges is constant. <!--SR:!2025-04-29,65,310!2025-04-05,45,290-->
- [Coulomb's law](../../../../general/Coulomb's%20law.md) ::@:: In a _vacuum_, $$\mathbf {F} _{1}={\frac {q_{1}q_{2} }{4\pi \varepsilon _{0} } }{ {\hat {\mathbf {r} } }_{12} \over {|\mathbf {r} _{12}|}^{2} }$$ where $\mathbf {r_{12}=r_{1}-r_{2} }$ is the [displacement vector](../../../../general/displacement%20vector.md) between the charges, ${\hat {\mathbf {r} } }_{12}$ a [unit vector](../../../../general/unit%20vector.md) pointing from $q_{2}$ to $q_{1}$, and $\varepsilon _{0} \approx 8.854 \times 10^{-12}~\mathrm{F/m}$ the [electric constant](../../../../general/electric%20constant.md) (a.k.a. _permittivity of the free space_). <!--SR:!2025-07-25,127,290!2025-04-23,60,310-->
  - Coulomb's law / experiment ::@:: Coulomb used the _torsion balance_ to study the effects of electric charges. It can measure very weak forces. <!--SR:!2025-04-19,56,310!2025-04-25,62,310-->
- [questions § Coulomb's law](questions.md#Coulomb's%20law)

## week 1 lecture 2

- datetime: 2025-02-05T09:00:00+08:00/2025-02-05T10:20:00+08:00
- topic: electric field II
- [hierarchy problem](../../../../general/hierarchy%20problem.md) ::@:: Why is gravity so weak compared to electromagnetic force (and weak force and strong force)? <!--SR:!2025-05-21,77,333!2025-05-06,66,333-->
  - hierarchy problem / example ::@:: Consider two double positively charged helium ions. The electrostatic repulsion between them is about 10<sup>39</sup> times stronger than gravity. <!--SR:!2025-05-21,77,333!2025-05-08,68,333-->
  - hierarchy problem / idea ::@:: Even though gravity is very weak, it is the only force that matters at macroscopic scale. This is because gravity always attract but electrostatic force cancels out as objects have a net charge of zero. <!--SR:!2025-05-21,77,333!2025-05-07,67,333-->
- [scientific law](../../../../general/scientific%20law.md) ::@:: They are scientific generalizations based on _empirical observations_ of physical behavior. This highlights the _observational nature_ of the physical science. <!--SR:!2025-05-21,77,333!2025-05-14,70,333-->
- [electric field](../../../../general/electric%20field.md) ::@:: a vector field that associates to each point in space the force per unit of charge exerted on an infinitesimal test charge at rest at that point <!--SR:!2025-05-06,66,333!2025-04-25,51,313-->
  - electric field / experiment ::@:: We can "observe" the electric field by deflecting an electric beam. An electric beam are emitted electrons that pass through two plates electrodes with a potential difference. <p> The larger the potential difference, the more the electric beam deflects. Reversing the polarity of the potential difference leads to the electric beam being deflected the other way. <p> This shows the space between the plates are being permeated with a physical quantity that acts on charged particles, which should also be a vector. <!--SR:!2025-04-29,55,313!2025-04-23,49,313-->
  - electric field / calculation ::@:: In a _vacuum_, $$\mathbf {E} _{1}(\mathbf {r} _{0})={\frac {\mathbf {F} _{01} }{q_{0} } }={\frac {q_{1} }{4\pi \varepsilon _{0} } }{ {\hat {\mathbf {r} } }_{01} \over {|\mathbf {r} _{01}|}^{2} }={\frac {q_{1} }{4\pi \varepsilon _{0} } }{\mathbf {r} _{01} \over {|\mathbf {r} _{01}|}^{3} }$$ where $\mathbf {E} _{1}(\mathbf {r} _{0})$ is the component of the electric field at $q_{0}$ due to $q_{1}$. <p> Make use of the superposition principle when there are multiple electric charges. <p> For continuous charge distribution, we replace the summation with a line, surface, or volume integral, and the charge with charge density (resp. per length, per area, per volume) instead. <!--SR:!2025-04-13,47,313!2025-05-07,67,333-->
  - electric field / visualization ::@:: As it is a vector field, we can visualize it as many arrows representing the vector at certain positions in a region of space. <p> For a positively charged particle, the surrounding arrows diverge outwards (positive divergence). For a negatively charged particle, the surrounding arrows converge inwards (negative divergence). <!--SR:!2025-05-13,69,333!2025-04-26,52,313-->
  - electric field / approximation ::@:: We can approximate electric fields in some situations. <p> For concreteness, consider two equal positively charged particles $q_1, q_2$ at distance $d$ from each other. The electric field at very far away from the two charged particles (the distance from the middle of the two particles $D$ is $D \gg d$) is approximately the same as that generated by one positively charged particle with double the charge located at the middle of $q_1$ and $q_2$. <p> Another example is similar to above, but with a line charge instead, which at far away distance approximately looks like a point charge. Make use of symmetry when trying to work out this example. <!--SR:!2025-04-22,48,313!2025-04-29,55,313-->
  - electric field / interpretation ::@:: What is the electric field? Humans cannot detect it, but some other animals can. <p> Maxwell believed that electromagnetic fields are stress and strains in a medium that called _ether_, which permeates throughout the universe. But special relativity had forced us to abandon this idea. <p> Our current interpretation (at least in this course) is that it is a vector field determined by physical laws. <!--SR:!2025-05-15,71,333!2025-05-07,67,333-->

## week 1 tutorial

- datetime: 2025-02-06T18:00:00+08:00/2025-02-06T18:50:00+08:00
- topic: differential calculus
- [differential calculus](../../../../general/differential%20calculus.md)
  - differential calculus / [differential form](../../../../general/differential%20form.md) ::@:: No need to go too formal into its mathematical treatment for physics at this stage... <p> Treat $\mathrm dx$ as an infinitesimal amount. Then $f' = \frac {\mathrm df} {\mathrm dx}$. <p> $\mathrm d^2 x$ is an infinitesimal area. $\mathrm d^3 x$ is an infinitesimal volume. <!--SR:!2025-05-29,83,343!2025-05-29,83,343-->
- [gradient](../../../../general/gradient.md) ::@:: It of a scalar-valued differentiable function $f$ of several variables is the vector field (or vector-valued function) $\nabla f$ whose value at a point $p$ gives the direction and the rate of fastest increase. <!--SR:!2025-05-29,83,343!2025-05-29,83,343-->
  - gradient / definition ::@:: You have a 3D scalar field $\varphi$. Gather its partial derivatives along the Cartesian axes to get the gradient vector field. <p> Mathematically, the gradient is $\nabla \varphi(x, y, z) = \left. \frac {\partial \varphi} {\partial x} \right|_{(x, y, z)} \vec x + \left. \frac {\partial \varphi} {\partial y} \right|_{(x, y, z)} \vec y + \left. \frac {\partial \varphi} {\partial z} \right|_{(x, y, z)} \vec z$. Using infinitesimals, we have $\mathrm d\varphi = \frac {\partial \varphi} {\partial x} \mathrm dx + \frac {\partial \varphi} {\partial y} \mathrm dy + \frac {\partial \varphi} {\partial z} \mathrm dz$. <!--SR:!2025-04-14,45,323!2025-05-29,83,343-->
- [del](../../../../general/del.md) ::@:: We can treat $\nabla$ as an linear vector operator (but it is _not_ simply a vector as it has neither a magnitude nor a direction by itself): $\begin{bmatrix} \frac \partial {\partial x} & \frac \partial {\partial y} & \frac \partial {\partial z} \end{bmatrix}^\intercal$. Then it becomes clear $\nabla$ acts on a scalar, which in this case is $\varphi : \mathbb R^3 \to \mathbb R$, and returns its gradient $\nabla \varphi : \mathbb R^3 \to \mathbb R^3$. <p> This would make more sense later when we have the Laplace operator, which is $\nabla^2 = \nabla \cdot \nabla = \begin{bmatrix} \frac \partial {\partial x} & \frac \partial {\partial y} & \frac \partial {\partial z} \end{bmatrix}^\intercal \cdot \begin{bmatrix} \frac \partial {\partial x} & \frac \partial {\partial y} & \frac \partial {\partial z} \end{bmatrix}^\intercal = \begin{bmatrix} \frac {\partial^2} {\partial x^2} & \frac {\partial^2} {\partial y^2} & \frac {\partial^2} {\partial z^2} \end{bmatrix}^\intercal$. In this, we can see that the dot product works as expected. <!--SR:!2025-05-29,83,343!2025-05-29,83,343-->
- [gradient](../../../../general/gradient.md)
  - gradient / rules ::@:: The rules are quite similar to single-variable calculus. For example, let $\varphi(\vec r) = \vec r \cdot \vec r = \lVert \vec r \rVert^2 = r_1^2 + r_2^2 + r_3^2$. Then $\nabla \varphi(\vec r) = 2 \vec r = 2r_1 + 2r_2 + 2r_3$. Compare this with the derivative of $f(x) = x^2$ being $2x$. <!--SR:!2025-05-29,83,343!2025-05-29,83,343-->
- [divergence](../../../../general/divergence.md) ::@:: It is a vector operator that operates on a vector field, producing a scalar field giving the quantity of the vector field's source at each point. More technically, the divergence represents the volume density of the outward flux of a vector field from an infinitesimal volume around a given point. <!--SR:!2025-05-29,83,343!2025-04-03,34,303-->
  - divergence / definition ::@:: $\nabla \cdot \mathbf v = \begin{bmatrix} \frac \partial {\partial x} & \frac \partial {\partial y} & \frac \partial {\partial z} \end{bmatrix}^\intercal \cdot \begin{bmatrix} v_x & v_y & v_z \end{bmatrix}^\intercal = \frac {\partial v_x} {\partial x} + \frac {\partial v_y} {\partial y} + \frac {\partial v_z} {\partial z}$ <p> It looks like the dot product works as expected. <!--SR:!2025-05-29,83,343!2025-05-29,83,343-->
- [curl](../../../../general/curl%20(mathematics).md) ::@::  It is vector operator that describes the infinitesimal circulation of a vector field in three-dimensional Euclidean space. The curl at a point in the field is represented by a vector whose length and direction denote the magnitude and axis of the maximum circulation. The curl of a field is formally defined as the circulation density at each point of the field. <!--SR:!2025-04-02,34,303!2025-04-03,34,303-->
  - curl / definition ::@:: $\nabla \times \mathbf v = \begin{vmatrix} \mathbf x & \mathbf y & \mathbf z \\ \frac \partial {\partial x} & \frac \partial {\partial y} & \frac \partial {\partial z} \\ v_x & v_y & v_z \end{vmatrix} = \left\langle \frac {\partial v_z} {\partial y} - \frac {\partial v_y} {\partial z}, \frac {\partial v_x} {\partial z} - \frac {\partial v_z} {\partial x}, \frac {\partial v_y} {\partial x} - \frac {\partial v_x} {\partial y} \right\rangle$ <!--SR:!2025-06-04,74,283!2025-04-14,45,323-->
- [del](../../../../general/del.md)
  - del / properties
    - del / properties / linearity ::@:: It is a linear vector operator. So $\nabla$, $\nabla \cdot$, and $\nabla \times$ distributes over addition and is homogenous under _scalar_ (scalar in this context are scalar fields) multiplication. <!--SR:!2025-05-29,83,343!2025-05-29,83,343-->
    - del / properties / product rules (easier) ::@:: These 4 rules are the easier ones: $$\begin{aligned} \nabla (fg) & = f \nabla g + g \nabla f \\ \nabla \cdot (f \mathbf v) & = f (\nabla \cdot \mathbf v) + \mathbf v \cdot (\nabla f) \\ \nabla \times (f \mathbf v) & = f (\nabla \times \mathbf v) - \mathbf v \times (\nabla f) \\ \nabla \cdot (\mathbf u \times \mathbf v) & = -\mathbf u \cdot (\nabla \times \mathbf v) + \mathbf v \cdot (\nabla \times \mathbf u) \end{aligned}$$ <!--SR:!2025-04-11,18,203!2025-04-12,31,263-->
    - del / properties / product rules (harder) ::@:: These 2 rules are the harder ones: $$\begin{aligned} \nabla (\mathbf u \cdot \mathbf v) & = \mathbf u \times (\nabla \times \mathbf v) + (\mathbf u \cdot \nabla) \mathbf v + \mathbf v \times (\nabla \times \mathbf u) + (\mathbf v \cdot \nabla)\mathbf u \\ \nabla \times (\mathbf u \times \mathbf v) & = \mathbf u \, (\nabla \cdot \mathbf v) - (\mathbf u \cdot \nabla) \, \mathbf v - \mathbf v \, (\nabla \cdot \mathbf u) + (\mathbf v \cdot \nabla) \, \mathbf u \end{aligned}$$ <!--SR:!2025-04-12,23,223!2025-05-22,65,283-->

## week 2 lecture

- datetime: 2025-02-10T09:00:00+08:00/2025-02-10T10:20:00+08:00
- topic: Maxwell equations of electrostatics
- [field line](../../../../general/field%20line.md) ::@:: It is a graphical visual aid for visualizing vector fields. It consists of an imaginary integral curve which is tangent to the field vector at each point along its length. <!--SR:!2025-06-13,91,362!2025-06-05,84,362-->
  - field line / examples
    - field line / examples / point source ::@:: The field lines radiate outwards/inwards. <!--SR:!2025-06-13,91,362!2025-06-06,85,362-->
    - field line / examples / parallel plate capacitor ::@:: The field lines are roughly straight from one plate to another when far away from the capacitor edges. Close to the edges, the field lines start bending. <!--SR:!2025-06-14,92,362!2025-06-06,85,362-->
  - field lines / caution ::@:: The field lines should not cross each other. <!--SR:!2025-06-05,84,362!2025-06-08,87,362-->
- [flux](../../../../general/flux.md) ::@:: It describes any effect that appears to pass or travel (whether it actually moves or not) through a surface or substance. Flux is a concept in applied mathematics and vector calculus which has many applications in physics. <p> In vector calculus flux is a scalar quantity, defined as the surface integral of the perpendicular component of a vector field over a surface. <!--SR:!2025-05-05,58,342!2025-06-09,88,362-->
  - flux / equation (for electric field) ::@:: $$\Phi_E \equiv \oiint_S \! \mathbf E \cdot \mathrm d \mathbf A \,,$$ where $\Phi_E$ is the flux out of the surface $S$, which encloses a volume; $\mathbf E$ is the electric field, $\cdot$ is the dot product, and $\mathrm d\mathbf A$ is an infinitesimal area of the surface oriented outwards (outward normal of the surface). <!--SR:!2025-05-06,59,342!2025-06-08,87,362-->
- [Gauss's law](../../../../general/Gauss's%20law.md) ::@:: In its integral form, it states that the flux of the electric field out of an arbitrary closed surface is proportional to the electric charge enclosed by the surface, irrespective of how that charge is distributed. <p> In its differential form, it states that the divergence of the electric field is proportional to the local density of charge. <!--SR:!2025-06-04,83,362!2025-04-29,53,342-->
  - Gauss's law / mathematical theorem ::@:: an application of the divergence theorem <!--SR:!2025-06-14,92,362!2025-06-12,90,362-->
  - Gauss's law / interpretation ::@:: For the integral form: Consider a volume. The (net) flux out of its surface is only affected by the charge enclosed in the volume. Any charges outside the volume does not change the (net) flux, since for an outside charge, any flux entering the volume is canceled by the same amount of flux exiting the volume. <p> However, this does _not_ mean the flux on the surface is solely determined by the charge enclosed by the volume. Charge outside can modify the flux, it is just that the (net) flux out of the surface does not change. <p> For the derivative form: Charge causes divergence in the electric field. <!--SR:!2025-06-06,85,362!2025-06-09,88,362-->
  - Gauss's law / integral form ::@:: $$\oiint_S \! \mathbf E \cdot \mathrm d \mathbf A = \frac {Q_{\text{enc} } } {\varepsilon_0} \,,$$ where $Q_{\text{enc} }$ is the _total_ (including both _free_ and _bound_) charge in the volume enclosed by the surface $S$. <!--SR:!2025-04-30,55,342!2025-06-10,88,362-->
  - Gauss's law / differential form ::@:: $$\nabla \cdot \mathbf E = \frac \rho {\varepsilon_0} \,,$$ where $\rho$ is the _total_ (including both _free_ and _bound_) charge _density_. <p> This form may be obtained fro the integral form using the divergence theorem. <!--SR:!2025-06-10,88,362!2025-05-07,60,342-->
    - Gauss's law / differential form / from Coulomb's law ::@:: We can consider the electric field for a continuous charge distribution. Then apply the divergence operator, and make use of the identity: $$\nabla \cdot \left( \frac {\mathbf r} {\lvert \mathbf r \rvert^3} \right) = 4 \pi \delta(\mathbf r)$$ and the "sifting property" of the Dirac delta function. <p> The above identity says that the vector field given by $$\frac {\mathbf r} {\lvert \mathbf r \rvert^3}$$ has zero divergence except for the origin, which has a divergence such that when (volume-)integrated over results in $4\pi$. <!--SR:!2025-04-29,53,342!2025-04-29,53,342-->
- [Gaussian surface](../../../../general/Gaussian%20surface.md) ::@:: It is a closed surface in three-dimensional space through which the flux of a vector field is calculated. <p> They are usually carefully chosen to exploit _symmetries_ of a situation to simplify the calculation of the surface integral. If the Gaussian surface is chosen such that for every point on the surface the component of the electric field along the normal vector is _constant_, then the calculation will not require difficult integration as the constants which arise can be taken out of the integral. <!--SR:!2025-06-09,88,362!2025-06-07,86,362-->
  - Gaussian surface / spherical symmetry ::@:: If we use a sphere surface to calculate the electric field produced by a spherically symmetric charge that is fully enclosed by the surface, we find that the electric field it produces is as-if all charges were at the center. (For more, see shell theorem.) <!--SR:!2025-06-10,88,362!2025-04-15,41,322-->

## week 2 lecture 2

- datetime: 2025-02-12T09:00:00+08:00/2025-02-12T10:20:00+08:00
- topic: electric potential
- [electric potential](../../../../general/electric%20potential.md) ::@:: It is the amount of work/energy needed per unit of electric charge to move the charge from a reference point to a specific point in an electric field. <!--SR:!2025-06-07,86,362!2025-06-12,90,362-->
  - electric potential / definition (electrostatic) ::@:: In an _static_ electric field, we have $$V_{\mathbf {E} }=-\int _{\mathcal {C} }\mathbf {E} \cdot \mathrm {d} {\boldsymbol {\ell } }\,.$$ Since the electric field is conservative, by the gradient theorem we have $$\mathbf {E} =-\mathbf {\nabla } V_{\mathbf {E} }\,.$$ <!--SR:!2025-04-29,53,342!2025-06-11,89,362-->
  - electric potential / continuous calculation ::@:: In a _vacuum_ (or if $\rho$ does not exclude the _bound_ charges), $$V_{\mathbf {E} }(\mathbf {r} )={\frac {1}{4\pi \varepsilon _{0} } }\int _{R}{\frac {\rho (\mathbf {r} ')}{|\mathbf {r} -\mathbf {r} '|} }\mathrm {d} ^{3}r'\,,$$ which can be derived by knowing that $\nabla \left(\frac 1 {\lvert \mathbf r \rvert} \right) = -\frac {\hat{\mathbf r} } {\lvert \mathbf r \rvert^2}$. (Notice the similarity to $\left(\frac 1 x \right)' = -\frac 1 {x^2}$.) <!--SR:!2025-04-14,38,322!2025-04-17,40,322-->
  - electric potential / curl ::@:: It is curl-free for a _static_ electric field. So it means the produced electric field by a potential is _conservative_. <p> Consider a closed loop (curve) $L$ in the static electric field and apply Stokes' theorem: $$\oint_L \! \mathbf E \cdot \mathrm d\mathbf l = \iint_S \! (\nabla \times \mathbf E) \cdot \mathrm d\mathbf A \,,$$ where $S$ is an oriented surface with $L$ as its boundary. Since the field is curl-free, the integrand in the right hand side is always 0. So the left hand side is 0. This means after following a closed loop in the electric field, the net work done is 0. <!--SR:!2025-04-29,53,342!2025-04-29,53,342-->
  - electric potential / [Maxwell's equations](../../../../general/Maxwell's%20equations.md) ::@:: For a _static_ electric field (no changing magnetic field), the curl-free nature of the field gives us the 2nd equation: $$\nabla \times \mathbf E = \mathbf 0 \,.$$ <p> (With a changing magnetic field, an additional term is needed.) <!--SR:!2025-06-11,89,362!2025-06-12,90,362-->
  - electric potential / reference point ::@:: We can set any arbitrary point as the point where the electric potential is 0. Another common point to use as a reference is the point at infinity. <!--SR:!2025-06-11,89,362!2025-06-13,91,362-->
  - electric potential / finding electric field ::@:: We can use the gradient to find the electric field. Use symmetry if needed to simplify the calculation. <!--SR:!2025-06-08,87,362!2025-06-04,83,362-->
  - electric potential / [equipotential](../../../../general/equipotential.md) ::@:: We can visualize the electric potential using this. They are basically contour lines of the electric potential. <!--SR:!2025-06-07,86,362!2025-06-14,92,362-->
- [electric field](../../../../general/electric%20field.md)
  - electric field / near a surface ::@:: Consider a surface in _vacuum_ with surface charge density $\rho$. We consider the _difference_ of the electric field _just_ above and below the surface. <p> First, consider the difference's normal component. Using a Gaussian pillow box (a rectangle box) and shrinking one of its side such that the box approaches the surface, we can apply Gauss's law and find that the difference's normal component has a magnitude of $\frac {\rho} {\varepsilon_0}$. This means a discontinuity in the electric field crossing the surface. <p> Next, consider the difference's tangential component. Using a loop and shrinking one of its side such that the loop approaches a line on the surface, apply that the electric field is conservative and find that the difference's tangential component has 0 magnitude. This means continuity in the electric field moving along the surface. <!--SR:!2025-05-28,71,357!2025-04-14,38,337-->
    - electric field / near a surface / implications ::@:: Consider an ideal electric conductor with zero electric resistance in a _vacuum_. Any electrostatic field inside the conductor would arrange the charges inside to cancel out the electric field. Thus the electric field inside is 0. So if the conductor has any overall net charge, it must reside on the surface. <p> This is exactly the situation we have described above. We also have that the electric field outside infinitely close to the surface is ${\frac {\sigma }{\varepsilon _{0} } }{\hat {\mathbf {n} } }$, where $\hat {\mathbf n}$ is the outward normal, by the _difference_ of the electric field we have just calculated above. <!--SR:!2025-06-16,91,377!2025-04-27,46,337-->
- electric potential
  - electric potential / near a surface ::@:: Consider a surface with surface charge density $\rho$. We consider the _difference_ of the electric potential _just_ above and below the surface. <p> We simply notice that the path length approaches zero and the electric field magnitude is not unbounded (infinite), so as the distance approaches 0, the potential difference approaches 0. <!--SR:!2025-06-24,97,377!2025-05-20,68,357-->

## week 2 tutorial

- datetime: 2025-02-13T18:00:00+08:00/2025-02-13T18:50:00+08:00
- topic: surface integrals
- [line integral](../../../../general/line%20integral.md) ::@:: An integral where the function to be integrated is evaluated along a curve. The function to be integrated can be a scalar field or a vector field. <!--SR:!2025-06-22,96,377!2025-06-21,95,377-->
  - line integral / over a scalar field ::@:: $$\int_C \! f \,\mathrm ds = \int_a^b \! f(\mathbf r(t)) \lvert \mathbf r'(t) \rvert \,\mathrm dt \,,$$ where $C$ is a curve, $f$ is a scalar field, $\mathrm ds$ is an infinitesimal arc length, $\mathbf r(t)$ is a bijective parameterization of $C$, and $\lvert \mathbf r'(t) \rvert \, \mathrm dt$ is the length of an infinitesimal vector following $C$. <p> If $C$ is a closed curve, we can use $\oint$ instead of $\int$. <!--SR:!2025-05-19,68,357!2025-05-13,62,357-->
  - line integral / over a vector field ::@:: $$\int_C \! \mathbf F(\mathbf r) \cdot \mathrm d\mathbf r \,,$$ where $C$ is a curve, $\mathbf F$ is a vector field, $\cdot$ is the dot product, and $\mathrm d\mathbf r$ is an infinitesimal vector following $C$. <p> If $C$ is a closed curve, we can use $\oint$ instead of $\int$. <!--SR:!2025-06-25,98,377!2025-06-28,101,377-->
  - line integral / single-variable calculus ::@:: The single-variable calculus you have been doing has always been a line integral! It is just that the space is 1D, i.e. the real number line, and obviously, the only curves in a 1D space are straight lines. <!--SR:!2025-06-16,91,377!2025-06-16,91,377-->
- [surface integral](../../../../general/surface%20integral.md) ::@:: A generalization of multiple integrals to integration over surfaces. It can be thought of as the double integral analogue of the line integral. <!--SR:!2025-06-26,99,377!2025-05-20,68,357-->
  - surface integral / over a vector field ::@:: $${\begin{aligned}\iint _{S}{\mathbf {v} }\cdot \mathrm {d} {\mathbf {s} }&=\iint _{S}\left({\mathbf {v} }\cdot {\mathbf {n} }\right)\,\mathrm {d} s\\&{}=\iint _{T}\left({\mathbf {v} }(\mathbf {r} (s,t))\cdot { {\frac {\partial \mathbf {r} }{\partial s} }\times {\frac {\partial \mathbf {r} }{\partial t} } \over \left\|{\frac {\partial \mathbf {r} }{\partial s} }\times {\frac {\partial \mathbf {r} }{\partial t} }\right\|}\right)\left\|{\frac {\partial \mathbf {r} }{\partial s} }\times {\frac {\partial \mathbf {r} }{\partial t} }\right\|\mathrm {d} s\,\mathrm {d} t\\&{}=\iint _{T}{\mathbf {v} }(\mathbf {r} (s,t))\cdot \left({\frac {\partial \mathbf {r} }{\partial s} }\times {\frac {\partial \mathbf {r} }{\partial t} }\right)\mathrm {d} s\,\mathrm {d} t.\end{aligned} }$$ The cross product on the right-hand side of this expression is a \(not necessarily unital\) surface normal determined by the parameterization. <p> If $S$ is a closed surface, we can use $\oiint$ instead of $\iint$. <!--SR:!2025-04-06,30,317!2025-06-01,74,357-->
- [volume integral](../../../../general/volume%20integral.md) ::@:: It is an integral over a 3-dimensional domain; that is, it is a special case of multiple integrals. <!--SR:!2025-06-21,95,377!2025-06-27,100,377-->
  - volume integral / over a scalar field ::@:: It can also mean a [triple integral](../../../../general/multiple%20integral.md) within a region $D\subset \mathbb {R} ^{3}$ of a [function](../../../../general/function%20(mathematics).md) $f(x,y,z)$, and is usually written as: $$\iiint _{D}f(x,y,z)\,dx\,dy\,dz.$$ A volume integral in [cylindrical coordinates](../../../../general/cylindrical%20coordinates.md) is $$\iiint _{D}f(\rho ,\varphi ,z)\rho \,d\rho \,d\varphi \,dz,$$ and a volume integral in [spherical coordinates](../../../../general/spherical%20coordinates.md) \(using the ISO convention for angles with $\varphi$ as the azimuth and $\theta$ measured from the polar axis \(see more on [conventions](../../../../general/spherical%20coordinate%20system.md#conventions)\)\) has the form $$\iiint _{D}f(r,\theta ,\varphi )r^{2}\sin \theta \,dr\,d\theta \,d\varphi .$$ <!--SR:!2025-04-14,38,337!2025-05-28,71,357-->
  - volume integral / over a vector field ::@:: Usually, this means doing the volume integral component-wise. That is, breakup the vector field into 3 scalar fields, do 3 volume integrals, and then finally combine the results. <!--SR:!2025-06-26,99,377!2025-06-25,98,377-->

## week 3 lecture

- datetime: 2025-02-17T09:00:00+08:00/2025-02-17T10:20:00+08:00
- topic: electric potential energy
- experiment: fluorescent tube ::@:: Bring a fluorescent tube near the surface of a van der Graff generator. The tube lights up, as the distance to the sphere of the van der Graff generator decreases. <!--SR:!2025-06-22,96,377!2025-05-14,63,357-->
  - experiment: fluorescent tube / interpretation ::@:: Strong electric fields created by the van der Garff generator causes arc discharges in the tube. Atoms becomes a plasma of positively charged ions and electrons. They gain kinetic energy due to Coulomb forces. This energy is transferred to mercury atoms via inelastic collisions. Mercury atoms emit this energy away via radiation. <!--SR:!2025-05-13,62,357!2025-05-20,68,357-->
- [work](../../../../general/work%20(physics).md)
  - work / line integral ::@:: If the force is variable, then work is given by the [line integral](../../../../general/line%20integral.md): $$W=\int {\vec {F} }\cdot d{\vec {s} }$$ where $d{\vec {s} }$ is the tiny change in displacement vector. <!--SR:!2025-06-24,97,377!2025-05-20,68,357-->
- electric potential
  - electric potential / work ::@:: The work of moving a charge $Q$ from $\mathbf a$ to $\mathbf b$ is $$W = Q(V(\mathbf b) - V(\mathbf a)) \,.$$ The negative sign (in the definition of electric potential $\nabla V = -\mathbf E$) is missing from here because adding work to a particle means fighting _against_ the Coulomb force, so two negative signs cancel out. Further, the result is path independent because the Coulomb force is conservative. <p> Note this assumes two things: the charge being moved is assumed to not disturb the field; and the charge is moved with negligible acceleration, so as to avoid the test charge acquiring kinetic energy or producing radiation. <!--SR:!2025-06-16,91,377!2025-04-14,38,337-->
  - electric potential / reference point ::@:: A common reference point $\mathbf a$, where $V(\mathbf a) = 0$ is set, is at infinity. Then we obtain $$W = Q(V(\mathbf r) - V(\infty)) = QV(\mathbf r) \,.$$ <!--SR:!2025-06-13,88,377!2025-06-22,96,377-->
- [electric potential energy](../../../../general/electric%20potential%20energy.md) ::@:: It is a potential energy (measured in joules) that results from conservative Coulomb forces and is associated with the configuration of a particular set of point charges within a defined system. An object may be said to have \(_this_\) energy by virtue of either its own electric charge or its relative position to other electrically charged objects. <!--SR:!2025-06-24,97,377!2025-06-25,98,377-->
  - electric potential energy / point charges ::@:: In a _vacuum_ (or if _bound_ charges are considered), $$U_E = \frac 1 2 \sum_{i = 1}^n q_i V_i(\mathbf r_i) \,,$$ for $n$ charges, each of charge $q_i$ at position $\mathbf r_i$, and $V_i$ is the electrostatic potential due to all point charges except the one at $\mathbf r_i$. <!--SR:!2025-06-16,91,377!2025-06-14,89,377-->
    - electric potential energy / point charges / derivation ::@:: Consider bringing the $n$ charges from infinity to $\mathbf r_i$ one-by-one, in a _vacuum_ (or if _bound_ charges are also considered). <p> The 1st charge takes no work. The 2nd charge takes some work due to the 1st charge. The 3rd charge takes some work due to the 1st charge and 2nd charge. So we can see the $i$-th charge take work that is proportional to the sum of 1 to $i - 1$-th charges. This forms a triangular sum when visualized in a $n \times n$ 2D grid. Double each term to get a square sum, where the diagonals are 0 (self-interactions take no work). So we have $$U_E = \frac 1 2 \frac 1 {4\pi \varepsilon_0} \sum_{\substack{1 \le i,j \le n \\ i \ne j} } \frac {q_i q_j} {\lvert \mathbf r_i - \mathbf r_j \rvert} = \frac 1 2 \frac 1 {4 \pi \varepsilon_0} \sum_{i = 1}^n q_i \sum_{\substack{j = 1 \\ i \ne j} }^n \frac {q_j} {\lvert \mathbf r_i - \mathbf r_j \rvert} = \frac 1 2 \sum_{i = 1}^n q_i V_i(\mathbf r_i) \,,$$ where $V_i$ is the electrostatic potential due to all point charges except the one at $\mathbf r_i$. <!--SR:!2025-04-29,47,337!2025-04-05,29,317-->
  - electric potential energy / continuous charge ::@:: The energy density, or energy per unit volume, ${\frac {dU}{dV} }$, of the [electrostatic field](../../../../general/electrostatic%20field.md#electrostatic%20fields) of a continuous charge distribution is \(works even with _bounded_ charges\): $$u_{e}={\frac {dU}{dV} }={\frac {1}{2} }\varepsilon _{0}\left|{\mathbf {E} }\right|^{2} \,.$$ To get the configuration energy for the whole continuous charge, integrate the above over the entire space. <p> An alternative way, if the _total_ (including _free_ and _bound_) charge density $\rho$ and potential $V$ are known beforehand, is $$U_E = \frac 1 2 \iiint\limits_{\text{all space} } \! \rho(\mathbf r) V(\mathbf r) \,\mathrm dV \,.$$ (Of course, you can restrict the integration domain to where $\rho$ is nonzero.) <!--SR:!2025-04-14,38,337!2025-04-05,29,317-->
    - electric potential energy / continuous charge / derivation ::@:: A similar argument to that for point charges but with infinitesimal charges would yield: $$U_E = \frac 1 2 \iiint\limits_{\text{all space} } \! \rho(\mathbf r) V(\mathbf r) \,\mathrm dV \,.$$ Manipulate it using vector calculus: $$\begin{aligned} U_E & = \frac 1 2 \iiint\limits_{\text{all space} } \! \rho(\mathbf r) V(\mathbf r) \,\mathrm dV \\ & = \frac {\varepsilon_0} 2 \iiint\limits_{\text{all space} } \! V (\nabla \cdot \mathbf E) \,\mathrm{d}V \\ & = \frac {\varepsilon_0} 2 \iiint\limits_{\text{all space} } \! (\nabla \cdot (V \mathbf E) - \mathbf E \cdot (\nabla V)) \,\mathrm dV \\ & = \frac {\varepsilon_0} 2 \iiint\limits_{\text{all space} } \! \lvert \mathbf E \rvert^2 \,\mathrm dV \,. \end{aligned}$$ The last equality uses the divergence theorem: $$\left\lvert \iiint\limits_{\text{all space} } \! \nabla \cdot (V \mathbf E) \,\mathrm dV \right\rvert = \left\lvert \oiint_{\text{boundary} } \! V \mathbf E \cdot \mathrm d\mathbf A \right\rvert \le \max_{\text{boundary} } \lvert V \rvert \left\lvert \oiint_{\text{boundary} } \! \mathbf E \cdot \mathrm d\mathbf A \right\rvert = 0 \,.$$ The last equality is because $V \to 0$ as $r \to \infty$ (expanding the boundary to cover all space) but the integral is bounded ($\frac {Q_{\text{enc} } } {\varepsilon_0}$ by Gauss's law). <p> Finally, for the above integral to hold for all space, the integrand must equal $\frac {\mathrm dU_E} {\mathrm dV}$. <!--SR:!2025-04-06,30,317!2025-04-06,30,317-->
  - electric potential energy / self-energy of point charges ::@:: Note that point charges have infinite self-energy. That is, to assemble a point charge from infinitesimal charges infinitely far away, you need infinite work. This can be found out using the equation for continuous charge to calculate the self-energy of a spherical shell charge of finite radius, and then shrinking it to a point charge. <p> This explains discrepancy between the equations for point charges and continuous charge. For example, trying to apply the continuous charge equation for a lone point charge results does not work well (the electric field is infinite at the point charge), while that using the point charge equation is zero work. We can say that the equation for point charges _excludes_ the self-energy of point charges, because it is meaningless (infinite). <!--SR:!2025-06-23,96,377!2025-05-28,71,357-->

## week 3 lecture 2

- datetime: 2025-02-19T09:00:00+08:00/2025-02-19T10:20:00+08:00
- topic: electric dipoles and multipoles
- [dipole](../../../../general/dipole.md) ::@:: It is the separation of the positive and negative electric charges found in any electromagnetic system. A simple example of this system is a pair of charges of equal magnitude but opposite sign separated by some typically small distance. <!--SR:!2025-06-06,77,369!2025-06-03,75,368-->
  - dipole / electric potential ::@:: Consider two opposite electric charges $+q$ and $-q$ separated by a distance of $2d$. Let their center be the origin. We want to find the electric potential at $\mathbf r$, $V(\mathbf r)$, where $\lvert \mathbf r \rvert \gg d$. <p> We could say $V(\mathbf r) \approx 0$, which is true, but we can get a better approximation. <!--SR:!2025-03-30,25,369!2025-03-30,25,368-->
    - dipole / electric potential / approximation ::@:: We want to find $V(\mathbf r)$ in a _vacuum_. Obviously, $V(\mathbf r) = \frac q {4\pi\varepsilon_0} \left(\frac 1 {\lvert \mathbf r - \mathbf d \rvert} - \frac 1 {\lvert \mathbf r + \mathbf d \rvert} \right)$. But we only want the approximating expression to contain $r, d, \theta$ instead of vectors, where $r = \lvert \mathbf r \rvert$, $d = \lvert \mathbf d \rvert$, and $\theta$ is the angle between the aforementioned two vectors. <p> We can use the cosine law: $$\begin{aligned} V(\mathbf r) & = \frac q {4\pi\varepsilon_0} \left(\frac 1 {\sqrt{r^2 + d^2 - 2rd \cos \theta} } - \frac 1 {\sqrt{r^2 + d^2 + 2rd \cos \theta} } \right) \\ & = \frac q {4\pi\varepsilon_0} \frac 1 r \left(\frac 1 {\sqrt{1 + (d / r)^2 - 2(d/r) \cos\theta} } - \frac 1 {\sqrt{1 + (d/r)^2 + 2(d/r) \cos\theta} } \right) \,. \end{aligned}$$ However, this looks messy, and we want an expression in terms of some integer power of some variables... <p> Let $\varepsilon_\pm = (d / r) (d / r \pm 2 \cos\theta)$. We can use Taylor series to approximate the square roots: $$\begin{aligned} \frac 1 {\sqrt{1 + \varepsilon_\pm} } & = \binom {-1/2} 0 \varepsilon_\pm^0 + \binom {-1/2} 1 \varepsilon\pm^1 + \binom {-1/2} 2 \varepsilon_\pm^2 + \cdots \\ & = 1 + \frac {(-1/2)} {1!} \varepsilon_\pm + \frac {(-1/2)(-3/2)} {2!} \varepsilon_\pm^2 + \cdots \\ & = 1 - \frac 1 2 \varepsilon_\pm + \frac 3 8 \varepsilon_\pm^2 + \cdots \,. \end{aligned}$$ Now we consider each tem of the above approximation in the context of $V(\mathbf r)$. Consider the first term $1$. If we truncate the series here, we are basically saying $V(\mathbf r) = 0$, which is approximately correct, but we want a more accurate approximation. Truncating at the second term $-\frac 1 2 \varepsilon_\pm$ suffices, since it produces $-\frac 1 2 \varepsilon_- + \frac 1 2 \varepsilon_+ = \frac 1 2 \frac d r 4 \cos \theta = \frac {2d \cos \theta} r$, a non-zero term. Also, the higher terms $\varepsilon_\pm^2$ and so on do not produce any more terms with $d/r$ having the exponent 1. <p> So finally, we have the better approximation: $$V(\mathbf r) \approx \frac q {4\pi \varepsilon_0} \frac {2d \cos \theta} {r^2} \,.$$ It shows that the potential of a dipole is approximately proportional to $1 / r^2$ when $r \gg d$. Now consider what happens if we have more terms...? <!--SR:!2025-04-17,33,329!2025-04-17,33,329-->
    - dipole / electric potential / better approximations ::@:: It turns out the higher terms correspond to quadrupole (a square with alternating charges as its vertices), octopole (a cube with alternating charges as its vertices), and so on. And we can also see that an electric charge is a monopole. <p> There is also a pattern with regards to the electric potential. A monopole has $V \propto 1/r$, a dipole has $V \propto 1 / r^2$, a quadrupole has $V \propto 1 / r^3$, a octopole has $V \propto 1 / r^4$, and so on. <!--SR:!2025-03-30,25,369!2025-06-03,75,368-->
- [axial multipole moments](../../../../general/axial%20multipole%20moments.md) ::@:: It is a series expansion of the electric potential of a charge distribution localized close to the origin along one Cartesian axis. <!--SR:!2025-03-29,24,368!2025-04-16,32,329-->
  - axial multipole moments / point charges ::@:: If we repeat the above dipole approximation derivation in a _vacuum_, but with only 1 charge, we have $$V(\mathbf r) = \frac q {4\pi\varepsilon_0} \frac 1 r \left(1 - \frac 1 2 \varepsilon + \frac 3 8 \varepsilon^2 + \cdots \right) \,,$$ where $\varepsilon = (d / r) (d / r - 2\cos\theta)$. With some care, we can convert the above expansion from in terms of $\varepsilon$ to $d / r$: $$\begin{aligned} V(\mathbf r) & = \frac q {4\pi\varepsilon_0} \frac 1 r \left(1 + \left(\frac d r\right) \cos \theta + \left(\frac d r \right)^2 \left(\frac {3 \cos^2 \theta - 1} 2 \right) + \left(\frac d r \right)^3 \left(\frac {5 \cos^3\theta - 3 \cos \theta} 2 + \cdots \right)\right) \\ & = \frac q {4\pi\varepsilon_0} \frac 1 r \sum_{k = 0}^\infty \left(\frac d r \right)^k P_k(\cos\theta) \,, \end{aligned}$$ where $P_k$ are the _Legendre polynomials_. <p> If we have multiple point charges, simply add the potentials together. The following form is more convenient for a system of _n_ point charges: $$V(\mathbf r) = \frac 1 {4 \pi \varepsilon_0} \sum_{k = 0}^\infty \frac 1 {r^{k + 1} } P_k(\cos \theta) \sum_{i = 1}^n q_i d_i^k  \,.$$ It is more convenient because terms that depend only on $\mathbf r$ are separated from terms that depend only on the charge configuration. <p> Note that if the charges are not all at a line (axial, as required by axial multipole moments), then $P_k(\cos \theta)$ also depends on the charge configuration and should be moved inside the integral. <!--SR:!2025-04-16,32,329!2025-05-13,54,349-->
  - axial multipole moments / continuous charge ::@:: The derivation is very similar to above, but using charge density instead. We have, in a _vacuum_ (or if $\rho$ considers _bound_ charges): $$V(\mathbf r) = \frac 1 {4\pi\varepsilon_0} \sum_{k = 0}^\infty \frac 1 {r^{k + 1} } P_k(\cos \theta) \int_{i = 1}^n \rho(l) l^k \,\mathrm{d}l \,.$$ <p> Note that if the charges are not all at a line (axial, as required by axial multipole moments), then $P_k(\cos \theta)$ also depends on the charge configuration and should be moved inside the integral. The integral would also need to integrate over a volume instead, with $l$ replaced by a vector $\mathbf l$ (and $l^k$ with $\lvert \mathbf l \rvert^k$). <!--SR:!2025-04-04,15,308!2025-04-28,44,328-->
  - axial multipole moments / interpretation ::@:: The first term in the approximation ($k = 0$) is the contribution to $V(\mathbf r)$ by treating the charge as a monopole. The second term is the contribution by treating the charge as a dipole, and so on. <p> We can see in the case of a electric dipole, the monopole term contributes nothing because the entire configuration has zero net charge, which allows the second term to dominate at large $r$. Compare with there being a nonzero net charge in the configuration, where the first term dominates at large $r$. This explains why we truncate up to $(d / r)^2$ to get an approximation for dipoles. <!--SR:!2025-05-18,58,349!2025-06-01,73,368-->
- [electric dipole moment](../../../../general/electric%20dipole%20moment.md) ::@:: It is a measure of the separation of positive and negative electrical charges within a system. <p> Theoretically, an electric dipole is defined by the first-order term of the multipole expansion; it consists of two equal and opposite charges that are infinitesimally close together, although real dipoles have separated charge. <!--SR:!2025-06-09,80,369!2025-03-28,23,369-->
  - electric dipole moment / motivation (approximation) ::@:: We can see that in the approximation of the electric potential of a configuration in a _vacuum_ (or if $\rho$ includes _bound_ charges) using multipole moments, the first term is $$\frac 1 {4\pi\varepsilon_0} \frac 1 {r^1} \int_V \! P_0(\cos \theta) \rho(\mathbf r') (r')^0 \,\mathrm d^3\mathbf r' = \frac 1 {4\pi\varepsilon_0} \frac 1 r Q \,,$$ where $Q$ is the net charge, since $P_0(x) = 1$. The second term is $$\begin{aligned} & \phantom = \frac 1 {4\pi\varepsilon_0} \frac 1 {r^2} \int_V \! P_1(\cos \theta) \rho(\mathbf r')(r')^1 \,\mathrm{d}^3\mathbf r' \\ & = \frac 1 {4\pi\varepsilon_0} \frac 1 {r^2} \int_V \! r' \cos \theta \rho(\mathbf r') \,\mathrm{d}^3 \mathbf r' \\ & = \frac 1 {4\pi\varepsilon_0} \frac {\hat {\mathbf r} } {r^2} \cdot \int_V \! \mathbf r' \rho(\mathbf r')\,\mathrm{d}^3 \mathbf r' \,, \end{aligned}$$ since $P_1(x) = x$. <p> The motivation is that it would be nice to define something like $Q$ but for dipoles. We can define it like so: $$\mathbf p(\mathbf r) = \int_V \! (\mathbf r' - \mathbf r) \rho(\mathbf r') \,\mathrm d^3 \mathbf r' \,,$$ where $\mathbf r$ is a reference point. But for an electric dipole, since the net charge is zero, the above expression gives the same vector no matter what $\mathbf r$ is. So we can just remove the argument $\mathbf r$ for electric dipoles. <!--SR:!2025-04-16,32,328!2025-04-16,32,329-->
  - electric dipole moment / definition ::@:: We can define it like so: $$\mathbf p(\mathbf r) = \int_V \! (\mathbf r' - \mathbf r) \rho(\mathbf r') \,\mathrm d^3 \mathbf r' \,,$$ where $\mathbf r$ is a reference point. (Whether $\rho$ includes _bound_ charges depends on the calculation context.) <p> For an electric dipole, the argument $\mathbf r$ can be dropped, since it makes no difference. <p> For point charges: $$\mathbf p(\mathbf r) = \sum_{k = 1}^n (\mathbf r'_k - \mathbf r) q_k\,.$$ When the point charges are neutral overall, the argument $\mathbf r$ can be dropped. For an electric dipole consisting of two point charges: $$\mathbf p = q\mathbf d \,,$$ where $\mathbf d$ is the vector from the negative charge to the positive charge. <!--SR:!2025-05-13,54,349!2025-04-29,45,348-->
  - electric dipole moment / electric potential ::@:: The electric potential due to an _idealized_ electric dipole in a _vacuum_: $$V(\mathbf r) = \frac 1 {4 \pi \varepsilon_0} \frac {\mathbf p \cdot \hat {\mathbf r} } {r^2} \,.$$ For electric dipoles with separation $d$, the above is _only_ an approximation that is accurate when $d \ll r$. <!--SR:!2025-05-12,53,348!2025-06-03,75,368-->
  - electric dipole moment / direction ::@:: It is directed from negative to positive. <!--SR:!2025-03-29,24,369!2025-03-28,23,369-->
  - electric dipole moment / to electric field ::@:: Assume we have an _idealized_ electric dipole with moment $\mathbf p$ in a _vacuum_. Find the gradient of its potential: $$\begin{aligned} \mathbf E(\mathbf r) & = -\nabla V(\mathbf r) \\ & = -\nabla\left( \frac 1 {4\pi\varepsilon_0} \frac 1 {r^2} \mathbf p \cdot \hat{\mathbf r} \right) \\ & = -\nabla\left( \frac 1 {4\pi\varepsilon_0} \frac {p \cos \theta} {r^2} \right) \,. \end{aligned}$$ However, if we do the derivation in terms of Euclidean coordinates, it would be too complicated. Let's do it in terms of spherical coordinates, with $\mathbf r$ being the radial unit vector and $\mathbf p$ pointing upwards (so $\theta$ is the polar angle): $$\begin{aligned} E_r & = -\frac {\partial V} {\partial r} = \frac 1 {4\pi\varepsilon_0} \frac {2 p \cos \theta} {r^3} \\ E_\theta & = - \frac 1 r \frac {\partial V} {\partial \theta} = \frac 1 {4\pi\varepsilon_0} \frac {p \sin \theta} {r^3} \\ E_\varphi & = - \frac 1 {r \sin\theta} \frac {\partial V} {\partial \varphi} = 0 \,. \end{aligned}$$ Combining: $$\mathbf E(r, \theta) = \frac p {4 \pi \varepsilon_0 r^3} (2 \cos\theta \hat {\mathbf r} + \sin\theta \hat {\boldsymbol \theta}) \,.$$ <!--SR:!2025-04-16,32,329!2025-05-18,58,349-->

## week 3 tutorial

- datetime: 2025-02-20T18:00:00+08:00/2025-02-20T18:50:00+08:00
- topic: Dirac delta function, Taylor expansion
- [Dirac delta function](../../../../general/Dirac%20delta%20function.md) ::@:: It is _generalized function_ (which is not a _function_) that is zero everywhere except at zero, and its "value" (it is not a _value_ in the sense of a _function_) at zero is infinite such that the integral over the entire real number line is 1. <p> It makes less sense to think of it as a function by itself, and more sense to think of it as an _action_ on another function inside an integral. <!--SR:!2025-04-06,25,373!2025-04-05,24,373-->
  - Dirac delta function / motivation ::@:: How do we represent a point charge as charge density? Such a point charge must have infinite charge density since the charge is nonzero but volume is zero. <p> Dirac delta function can be used to represent such point charges. <!--SR:!2025-04-06,25,373!2025-04-04,23,373-->
  - Dirac delta function / sifting property ::@:: $$\int _{-\infty }^{\infty }f(t)\,\delta (t-T)\,dt=f(T) \,.$$ The delta function is said to "sift out" the value of _f\(t\)_ at _t_ = _T_. <p> (there are some conditions of $f$  that we will ignore here) <!--SR:!2025-04-04,23,373!2025-04-04,23,373-->
  - Dirac delta function / multiple dimension ::@:: Multiply the 1-dimensional Dirac delta functions multiple times. Each "sifts out" the value of _f_ of a coordinate (noting that a point in multiple dimensions is represented by multiple coordinates) at a fixed value. <p> In that case, all coordinates of a point must match for the value of _f_ to be "sifted out" in the integrand of an integral. Otherwise the integrand is 0 (since at least one Dirac delta function does not "sift out" the value of _f_). <!--SR:!2025-04-06,25,373!2025-04-04,23,373-->
- [Taylor series](../../../../general/Taylor%20series.md) ::@:: It of a function is an infinite sum of terms that are expressed in terms of the function's derivatives at a single point. <!--SR:!2025-04-05,24,373!2025-04-03,23,373-->
  - Taylor series / motivation ::@:: We want to approximate a function near a point by a simpler function, and also want to know estimate the approximation error. <!--SR:!2025-04-05,24,373!2025-04-06,25,373-->
  - Taylor series / expression ::@:: Given a a [real](../../../../general/real-valued%20function.md) or [complex-valued function](../../../../general/complex-valued%20function.md) _f_<!-- markdown separator --> \(_x_\), that is [infinitely differentiable](../../../../general/infinitely%20differentiable%20function.md) at a [real](../../../../general/real%20number.md) or [complex number](../../../../general/complex%20number.md) _a_, it is $$f(a)+{\frac {f'(a)}{1!} }(x-a)+{\frac {f''(a)}{2!} }(x-a)^{2}+\cdots =\sum _{n=0}^{\infty }{\frac {f^{(n)}(a)}{n!} }(x-a)^{n}.$$ Here, _n_! denotes the [factorial](../../../../general/factorial.md) of _n_. The function _f_<sup>\(_n_\)</sup>\(_a_\) denotes the _n_-th [derivative](../../../../general/derivative.md) of _f_ evaluated at the point _a_. The derivative of order zero of _f_ is defined to be _f_ itself and \(_x_ − _a_\)<sup>0</sup> and 0! [are both defined to be 1](../../../../general/empty%20product.md). <p> _a_ is usually chosen to be 0. <!--SR:!2025-04-06,25,373!2025-04-03,23,373-->
  - Taylor series / conditions ::@:: Apart from being infinitely differentiable, the infinite series should also converge. The input values for which the series converge is the _region of convergence_. <p> Also, even if the series converges, it may not converge to the actual function value. <!--SR:!2025-04-04,23,373!2025-04-06,25,373-->
  - Taylor series / approximation ::@:: To approximate a function near a point, assuming the series converges, we truncate the series to a certain number of terms. The approximation is more accurate for inputs closer to _a_. <!--SR:!2025-04-04,23,373!2025-04-05,24,373-->
    - Taylor series / approximation / error ::@:: We use the _Lagrange form_ of Taylor's theorem. Assume we truncate the terms up to $x^k$ \(the $x^k$ term is included\). <p> Let _f_ : __R__ → __R__ be _k_ + 1 times [differentiable](../../../../general/differentiable%20function.md) on the [open interval](../../../../general/open%20interval.md#open%20interval) with _f_<sup>\(_k_\)</sup> [continuous](../../../../general/continuous%20function.md) on the [closed interval](../../../../general/closed%20interval.md#definitions%20and%20terminology) between $a$ and $x$. Then $$R_{k}(x)={\frac {f^{(k+1)}(\xi _{L})}{(k+1)!} }(x-a)^{k+1}$$ for some real number $\xi _{L}$ between $a$ and $x$. <p> We can thus find the maximum error by finding the _absolute_ maximum value of the above function in its domain. <!--SR:!2025-04-07,20,313!2025-04-13,26,333-->

## week 4 lecture

- datetime: 2025-02-24T09:00:00+08:00/2025-02-24T10:20:00+08:00
- topic: physics of capacitors
- [electrical conductor](../../../../general/electrical%20conductor.md) ::@:: an object or type of material that allows the flow of charge (electric current) in one or more directions <!--SR:!2025-04-05,24,373!2025-04-04,23,373-->
  - electrical conductor / ideal ::@::  Consider an ideal electric conductor with zero electric resistance in a _vacuum_. Any electrostatic field inside the conductor would arrange the charges inside to cancel out the electric field. Thus the electric field inside is 0, and so is its electric charge density by Gauss's law. This means the whole conductor is an equipotential. <p> If the conductor has any overall net charge, it must reside on the surface to minimize its energy configuration. <p> We also have that the electric field outside infinitely close to the surface is perpendicular. More precisely, it is ${\frac {\sigma }{\varepsilon _{0} } }{\hat {\mathbf {n} } }$, where $\hat {\mathbf n}$ is the outward normal, by the _difference_ of the electric field we have just calculated some time ago. <!--SR:!2025-03-31,19,353!2025-05-11,52,353-->
- [electrostatic induction](../../../../general/electrostatic%20induction.md) ::@:: It is a redistribution of electric charge in an object that is caused by the influence of nearby charges. In the presence of a charged body, an insulated conductor develops a positive charge on one end and a negative charge on the other end. <!--SR:!2025-04-05,24,373!2025-04-05,24,373-->
  - electrostatic induction / charge in a cavity ::@:: If we put a point charge $q$ inside a cavity of conductor, induction makes it appear as if the conductor has the charge $q$ viewed from the outside. <p> This can be derived from using Gauss's law. Intuitively, it is explained by charges on the cavity surface canceling the point charge $q$, while their corresponding opposite charges move to the outside surface to exhibit a charge of $q$. <!--SR:!2025-04-05,24,373!2025-04-06,25,373-->
- [capacitor](../../../../general/capacitor.md) ::@:: a device that stores electrical energy by accumulating electric charges on two closely spaced surfaces that are insulated from each other <!--SR:!2025-04-05,24,373!2025-04-04,23,373-->
  - capacitor / description ::@:: Consider  two ideal conductors, one of charge $Q_1$, the other of charge $Q_2$. Since the potential in an ideal conductor is constant, we can speak of their _potential difference_: $$V = V_+ - V_ = -\int_{(-)}^{(+)} \! \mathbf E \cdot \mathrm d\mathbf l \,.$$ We do not know what the exact charge distribution is, but by Coulomb's law, it should be proportional be the charges on the conductors. The proportionality constant is known as the _capacitance_: $$C \equiv \frac {Q_1 - Q_2} {2V} \,,$$ which has the special case for $Q \equiv Q_1 = -Q_2$: $$C = \frac Q V \,.$$ <!--SR:!2025-04-06,25,373!2025-04-04,23,373-->
- [capacitance](../../../../general/capacitance.md) ::@:: the ability of an object to store electric charge <!--SR:!2025-04-04,23,373!2025-04-04,23,373-->
  - capacitance / self-capacitance ::@:: It is defined by the ratio of charge and electric potential: $$C={\frac {q}{V} } \,.$$ <!--SR:!2025-04-06,25,373!2025-04-06,25,373-->
  - capacitance / mutual capacitance ::@:: If the charges on the plates are $+q$ and $-q$, and $V$ gives the [voltage](voltage.md) between the plates, then the capacitance $C$ is given by $$C={\frac {q}{V} } \,.$$ <!--SR:!2025-04-03,23,373!2025-04-04,23,373-->
  - capacitance / unit ::@:: farad, coulomb-per-volt; F = A<sup>2</sup> s<sup>4</sup> kg<sup>−1</sup> m<sup>−2</sup> <!--SR:!2025-04-03,23,373!2025-04-03,23,373-->
  - capacitance / parallel plate capacitor ::@:: Consider two ideal conductors of the same area $A$, one of charge $+Q$, the other of charge $-Q$, separated by a distance of $d$. The charge density is $\rho = \frac Q A$. From above, we know that the electric field magnitude created infinitely close to the surface is $\frac \rho \varepsilon$. If $A \gg d$, then the electric field between the plates are approximately uniform. Thus the potential difference between them is about $\frac {\rho d} {\varepsilon}$, and capacitance is: $$C = \frac {Q} {\frac {\rho d} {\varepsilon}} = \frac {Q \varepsilon} {\rho d} = \frac {A \varepsilon} d \,,$$ where $\varepsilon$ is the electric permittivity of the intervening medium ($\varepsilon = \varepsilon_0$ for a vacuum). <!--SR:!2025-04-06,25,373!2025-04-06,25,373-->
- capacitor
  - capacitor / discharge ::@:: Electric potential energy can be stored inside a capacitor. This energy represents bringing the charges from infinity to the plates. <p> To see this, maintain a potential difference between two parallel plates. Then stop maintaining the difference while shorting the two plates with a lamp. The lamp should light up for a short time. This shows electric current can release this energy. <p> The larger the capacitance, the more energy can be stored (per potential difference). <!--SR:!2025-05-25,64,373!2025-04-06,25,373-->
  - capacitor / energy storage ::@:: Consider two neutral parallel plate. We move infinitesimal charges from one plate to the other so that one plate has $+Q$ while the other plate has $-Q$. Moving an infinitesimal against a potential difference of $V \,\mathrm dq = q / C \,\mathrm dq$, where $q$ is the charge moved so far. Then simply integrate it: $$W = \int_0^Q \! \frac q C \,\mathrm dq = \frac 1 2 \frac {Q^2} C = \frac 1 2 Q V = \frac 1 2 CV^2 \,.$$ <!--SR:!2025-04-04,23,373!2025-04-05,24,373-->
    - capacitor / energy storage ::@:: We can also consider the energy stored in the electric field between the two plates of area $A$ and distance $d$. Assuming edge effects are negligible (i.e. $A \gg d$). Then the electric field is approximately uniform and has a magnitude of about $\frac \rho {\varepsilon}$. Calculate: $$W = Ad \frac \varepsilon 2 \left\lvert \frac \rho {\varepsilon} \right\rvert^2 = \frac {Ad \rho^2} {2 \varepsilon} = \frac {Q^2 d} {2 A \varepsilon} = \frac 1 2 \frac {Q^2} C = \frac 1 2 Q V = \frac 1 2 C V^2\,,$$ where $\varepsilon$ is the electric permittivity of the intervening medium ($\varepsilon = \varepsilon_0$ for a vacuum). <!--SR:!2025-03-31,19,353!2025-04-04,23,373-->
- capacitor
  - capacitor / capacitors in parallel ::@:: Using the schematic diagram to visualize parallel plates, it is apparent that each capacitor contributes to the total surface area. <!--SR:!2025-04-06,25,373!2025-04-03,23,373-->
    - capacitor / capacitors in parallel / voltage ::@:: Capacitors in a parallel configuration each have the same applied voltage. <!--SR:!2025-04-05,24,373!2025-04-04,23,373-->
    - capacitor / capacitors in parallel / capacitance ::@:: Their capacitance values add up. Charge is apportioned among them by capacitance value. $$C_{\mathrm {eq} }=\sum _{i=1}^{n}C_{i}=C_{1}+C_{2}+\cdots +C_{n}$$ <!--SR:!2025-04-05,24,373!2025-04-05,24,373-->
  - capacitor / capacitors in series ::@:: Connected in series, the schematic diagram reveals that the separation distance, not the plate area, adds up. <!--SR:!2025-04-05,24,373!2025-04-04,23,373-->
    - capacitor / capacitors in series / voltage ::@:: The total voltage difference from end to end is apportioned to each capacitor according to the inverse of its capacitance. <!--SR:!2025-04-05,24,373!2025-04-03,23,373-->
    - capacitor / capacitors in series / capacitance ::@:: The capacitors each store instantaneous charge build-up equal to that of every other capacitor in the series (in order to maintain charge neutrality of the wires connecting the capacitors). The entire series acts as a capacitor smaller than any of its components. $$C_{\mathrm {eq} }=\left(\sum _{i=1}^{n}{\frac {1}{C_{i} } }\right)^{-1}=\left({1 \over C_{1} }+{1 \over C_{2} }+{1 \over C_{3} }+\dots +{1 \over C_{n} }\right)^{-1}$$ <!--SR:!2025-04-04,23,373!2025-04-05,24,373-->

## week 4 lecture 2

- datetime: 2025-02-26T09:00:00+08:00/2025-02-26T10:20:00+08:00
- topic: physics of dielectrics
- [dielectric](../../../../general/dielectric.md) ::@:: an electrical insulator that can be polarized by an applied electric field <!--SR:!2025-04-04,23,373!2025-04-05,24,373-->
  - dielectric / polarization ::@:: When a dielectric material is placed in an electric field, electric charges do not flow through the material as they do in an electrical conductor, because they have no loosely bound, or free, electrons that may drift through the material, but instead they shift, only slightly, from their average equilibrium positions, causing _dielectric polarization_. <!--SR:!2025-04-06,25,373!2025-04-04,24,373-->
    - dielectric / polarization / effects ::@:: Because of dielectric polarization, positive charges are displaced in the direction of the field and negative charges shift in the direction opposite to the field. This creates an internal electric field that reduces the overall field within the dielectric itself. If a dielectric is composed of weakly bonded molecules, those molecules not only become polarized, but also reorient so that their symmetry axes align to the field. <!--SR:!2025-04-05,24,373!2025-04-04,23,373-->
  - dielectric / electric susceptibility ::@:: It is defined as the constant of proportionality \(which may be a [tensor](../../../../general/tensor.md)\) relating an electric field $\mathbf {E}$ to the induced dielectric polarization density $\mathbf {P}$ such that $$\mathbf {P} =\varepsilon _{0}\chi _{e}\mathbf {E} ,$$ where $\varepsilon _{0}$ is the [electric permittivity of free space](../../../../general/vacuum%20permittivity.md). <!--SR:!2025-04-06,25,373!2025-04-06,25,373-->
  - dielectric / relative permittivity ::@:: The susceptibility of a medium is related to its relative permittivity $\varepsilon _{r}$ by $$\chi _{e}\ =\varepsilon _{r}-1.$$ So in the case of a [classical vacuum](../../../../general/vacuum.md#electromagnetism), $$\chi _{e}\ =0.$$ <p> The [electric displacement](../../../../general/electric%20displacement.md) $\mathbf {D}$ is related to the polarisation density $\mathbf {P}$ by $$\mathbf {D} \ =\ \varepsilon _{0}\mathbf {E} +\mathbf {P} \ =\ \varepsilon _{0}\left(1+\chi _{e}\right)\mathbf {E} \ =\ \varepsilon _{0}\varepsilon _{r}\mathbf {E} .$$ <!--SR:!2025-04-04,23,373!2025-04-27,38,333-->
  - dielectric / applications
    - dielectric / applications / capacitors ::@:: Using dielectric with high permittivity as the intervening medium between the stored positive and negative charges allows a greater stored charge at a given voltage, i.e. capacitance is increased: $$C = \varepsilon_0 \varepsilon_r \frac A D = \varepsilon \frac A D \,,$$ where $\varepsilon_0$ is the vacuum permittivity, $\varepsilon_r$ is the relative permittivity of the dielectric, and $\varepsilon$ is the (absolute) permittivity of the dielectric. <!--SR:!2025-04-06,25,373!2025-04-05,24,373-->
- electric field
  - electric field / electric displacement field ::@:: In the presence of matter, it is helpful to extend the notion of the electric field into three vector fields: $$\mathbf {D} =\varepsilon _{0}\mathbf {E} +\mathbf {P}$$ where __P__ is the [electric polarization](../../../../general/electric%20polarization.md) – the volume density of [electric dipole moments](../../../../general/electric%20dipole%20moment.md), and __D__ is the [electric displacement field](../../../../general/electric%20displacement%20field.md). Since __E__ and __P__ are defined separately, this equation can be used to define __D__. The physical interpretation of __D__ is not as clear as __E__ \(effectively the field applied to the material\) or __P__ \(induced field due to the dipoles in the material\), but still serves as a convenient mathematical simplification, since Maxwell's equations can be simplified in terms of [free charges and currents](../../../../general/Maxwell's%20equations.md#macroscopic%20formulation). <!--SR:!2025-04-06,25,373!2025-03-31,19,353-->
- [electric displacement field](../../../../general/electric%20displacement%20field.md) ::@:: It is a vector field that appears in Maxwell's equations. It accounts for the electromagnetic effects of polarization and that of an electric field, combining the two in an auxiliary field. <!--SR:!2025-04-04,23,373!2025-04-03,23,373-->
  - electric displacement field / intuition ::@:: Consider a vacuum. Apply an electric field by a free charge density field. Then $\mathbf D = \varepsilon_0 \mathbf E$, and $\nabla \cdot \mathbf D = \rho = \rho_{\text{free} }$. The divergence of the electric displacement field is the free charge density field. <p> Then consider a dielectric. Then $\mathbf D = \varepsilon_0 \mathbf E + \mathbf P$. Assuming the same applied electric field, compare with above. $\mathbf E$ is reduced since the dielectric is polarized. So we add up the polarization field to compensate for it, so that $\nabla \cdot \mathbf D = \rho - \rho_{\text{bound} } = \rho_{\text{free} }$ again says the divergence of the electric displacement field is the free charge density field. This is done by subtracting the opposing bound charge density field. <!--SR:!2025-04-04,23,373!2025-04-05,24,373-->
  - electric displacement field / thinking ::@:: Strictly speaking, bound charges are fundamentally the same as free charges. So Maxwell's laws work even if there are bound charges, as long as you know all the bound charges. <p> In practice, it is easier to treat bound charges separately from free charges. The electric displacement field reflects this. \(Absolute\) permittivity of a material is intuitively understood by treating the bound charges as part of the "vacuum" and considering only free charges in this "vacuum". <!--SR:!2025-04-13,26,387!2025-04-11,25,388-->
- phenomenological average ::@:: Essentially just the macroscopic average over space and time: $$\overline{f(\mathbf r, t)} = \frac 1 {\lvert V(\mathbf r) \rvert T(t)} \int_{V(\mathbf r) \times T} \! f(\mathbf r', t') \,\mathrm d^3 \mathbf r' \,\mathrm dt' \,,$$ where $V(\mathbf r)$ is an infinitesimal (microscopically large, macroscopically small) volume and $T$ is an infinitesimal time slice. (Very bad abuse of notation here... But the original lecture notes were much more worse...) <!--SR:!2025-04-03,23,373!2025-04-04,23,373-->
  - phenomenological average / usage ::@:: Using it, we can statistically turn microscopic behaviors of many particles into macroscopic behaviors of an area. <p> Assuming macroscopic behaviors dominates microscopic behaviors, this average commutates with $\nabla$, $\nabla \cdot$, and $\nabla \times$. <!--SR:!2025-04-04,23,373!2025-04-05,24,373-->
- electric displacement field
  - electric displacement field / derivation ::@:: We consider the microscopic behaviors of many atoms under an applied electric field. Find the resulting potential field. <p> First, we write the resulting potential field using multipole expansion up to the 1st order (dipole term), integrating over the entire space. Then apply phenomenological average (apply another integral on top of the existing integral) to turn the microscopic behaviors into macroscopic behaviors. Finally, one should get an equation containing macroscopic charge density $\rho = \overline{\rho_e}$ and macroscopic polarization $\mathbf P = \overline{\mathbf \Pi_e}$. Apply the Laplace operator to derive the electric field and then the electric displacement field. <!--SR:!2025-04-03,23,373!2025-04-05,24,373-->
  - electric displacement field / Gauss's law ::@:: The displacement field satisfies [Gauss's law](../../../../general/Gauss's%20law.md) in a dielectric: $$\nabla \cdot \mathbf {D} =\rho -\rho _{\text{b} }=\rho _{\text{f} }$$ <p> In this equation, $\rho _{\text{f} }$ is the number of free charges per unit volume. <!--SR:!2025-04-03,23,373!2025-04-06,25,373-->
    - electric displacement field / Gauss's law / interpretation ::@:: These free charges are the ones that have made the volume non-neutral, and they are sometimes referred to as the [space charge](../../../../general/space%20charge.md). This equation says, in effect, that the flux lines of __D__ must begin and end on the free charges. In contrast $\rho _{\text{b} }$, which is called the bound charge, is an effective density of the charges that are part of a [dipole](../../../../general/dipole.md). <!--SR:!2025-04-06,25,373!2025-04-06,25,373-->
  - electric displacement field / curl ::@:: __D__ is not determined exclusively by the free charge. As __E__ has a curl of zero in electrostatic situations, it follows that $$\nabla \times \mathbf {D} =\nabla \times \mathbf {P}$$ <!--SR:!2025-04-06,25,373!2025-04-04,23,373-->
    - electric displacement field / curl / interpretation ::@:: The effect of this equation can be seen in the case of an object with a "frozen in" polarization like a bar [electret](electret.md), the electric analogue to a bar magnet. There is no free charge in such a material, but the inherent polarization gives rise to an electric field, demonstrating that the __D__ field is not determined entirely by the free charge. <!--SR:!2025-04-03,23,373!2025-04-06,25,373-->
- [polarization density](../../../../general/polarization%20density.md) ::@:: It is the vector field that expresses the volumetric density of permanent or induced electric dipole moments in a dielectric material. When a dielectric is placed in an external electric field, its molecules gain electric dipole moment and the dielectric is said to be polarized. <!--SR:!2025-04-06,25,373!2025-04-05,25,373-->
  - polarization density / definition ::@:: The polarization density __P__ of a dielectric inside an infinitesimal volume d<!-- markdown separator -->_V_ with an infinitesimal dipole moment d<!-- markdown separator -->__p__ is: $$\mathbf {P} ={\frac {\mathrm {d} \mathbf {p} }{\mathrm {d} V} }$$ The net charge appearing as a result of polarization is called bound charge and denoted $Q_{b}$. <!--SR:!2025-04-05,24,373!2025-03-31,19,353-->
  - polarization density / integral form ::@:: For a given volume _V_ enclosed by a surface _S_, the bound charge $Q_{b}$ inside it is equal to the flux of __P__ through _S_ taken with the negative sign, or $$-Q_{b}= \oiint_S \mathbf {P} \cdot \mathrm {d} \mathbf {A}$$ <!--SR:!2025-04-06,25,373!2025-04-04,23,373-->
  - polarization density / source of bound charges ::@:: If the surface warps the entire object in a _vacuum_, then the _net_ bound charge included in the volume must vanish, since both the negative and positive induced charges are included. <p> This also implies that _bound_ dipoles that are not balanced by their other poles can only be found at the Gaussian surface, since the other poles can be located outside the volume. Those inside must have both poles included in the volume. <!--SR:!2025-04-03,23,373!2025-04-04,23,373-->
  - polarization density / differential form ::@:: By the divergence theorem, Gauss's law for the field __P__ can be stated in _differential form_ as: $$-\rho _{b}=\nabla \cdot \mathbf {P} ,$$ where ∇ · __P__ is the divergence of the field __P__ through a given surface containing the bound charge density $\rho _{b}$. <!--SR:!2025-04-05,24,373!2025-04-06,25,373-->
  - polarization density / sources ::@:: 3 main types: dielectric, paraelectric, ferroelectric <!--SR:!2025-04-06,25,373!2025-04-03,23,373-->
  - polarization density / dielectric ::@:: The applied electric field shifts the positive and negative charges bound in a neutral atom relatively to each other so that electric dipoles are created. This is _deformation polarization_. <!--SR:!2025-04-06,25,373!2025-04-05,24,373-->
  - polarization density / paraelectric ::@:: The material contains permanent dipoles. Without an applied electric field, they are randomly oriented, cancelling out each other. With an applied electric field, they align to decrease potential energy of the system. This is _orientation polarization_. <p> This ordering tendency is opposed by the disordering tendency from thermal motion, leading to temperature-dependent responses. <!--SR:!2025-04-05,24,373!2025-04-05,24,373-->
  - polarization density / ferroelectric ::@:: The material contains permanent dipoles. Further, they orient themselves spontaneously (below a critical temperature). Without an applied electric field, they themselves produce a electric field. With an applied field, they exhibit field-dependant complicated behaviors (and will not be considered for now). <!--SR:!2025-04-05,24,373!2025-04-04,23,373-->
- dielectric
  - dielectric / electric susceptibility
  - dielectric / relative permittivity

## week 4 tutorial

- datetime: 2025-02-27T18:00:00+08:00/2025-02-27T18:50:00+08:00
- topic: integral theorems
- [gradient theorem](../../../../general/gradient%20theorem.md) ::@:: It says that a [line integral](../../../../general/line%20integral.md) through a [gradient field](../../../../general/conservative%20vector%20field.md) can be evaluated by evaluating the original scalar field at the endpoints of the curve. <!--SR:!2025-04-13,26,387!2025-04-10,24,388-->
  - gradient theorem / mathematical statement ::@:: If _φ_ : _U_ ⊆ __R__<sup>_n_</sup> → __R__ is a [differentiable function](../../../../general/differentiable%20function.md) and _γ_ a differentiable curve in _U_ which starts at a point __p__ and ends at a point __q__, then $$\int _{\gamma }\nabla \varphi (\mathbf {r} )\cdot \mathrm {d} \mathbf {r} =\varphi \left(\mathbf {q} \right)-\varphi \left(\mathbf {p} \right)$$ where ∇<!-- markdown separator -->_φ_ denotes the gradient vector field of _φ_. <!--SR:!2025-04-11,25,388!2025-04-12,26,388-->
  - gradient theorem / interpretation ::@:: The gradient theorem implies that line integrals through gradient fields are [path-independent](../../../../general/conservative%20vector%20field.md#path%20independence). In physics this theorem is one of the ways of defining a [_conservative_ force](../../../../general/conservative%20force.md). By placing _φ_ as potential, ∇<!-- markdown separator -->_φ_ is a [conservative field](../../../../general/conservative%20field.md). [Work](../../../../general/work%20(physics).md) done by conservative forces does not depend on the path followed by the object, but only the end points, as the above equation shows. <!--SR:!2025-04-12,26,388!2025-04-13,26,387-->
  - gradient theorem / note ::@:: You can choose any path satisfying the conditions going from the starting point to the ending point. It does not affect the result. <p> For a closed curve, the line integral is 0, since the starting point and ending point are identical. <!--SR:!2025-04-10,24,388!2025-04-10,24,388-->
- [divergence theorem](../../../../general/divergence%20theorem.md) ::@:: It states that the [surface integral](../../../../general/surface%20integral.md) of a vector field over a closed surface, which is called the "flux" through the surface, is equal to the [volume integral](../../../../general/volume%20integral.md) of the divergence over the region enclosed by the surface. <!--SR:!2025-04-11,25,388!2025-04-10,24,388-->
  - divergence theorem / mathematical statement ::@:: Suppose _V_ is a [subset](../../../../general/subset.md) of $\mathbb {R} ^{n}$ \(in the case of _n_ = 3, _V_ represents a volume in [three-dimensional space](../../../../general/three-dimensional%20space.md)\) which is [compact](../../../../general/compact%20space.md) and has a [piecewise](../../../../general/piecewise.md) [smooth boundary](../../../../general/smooth%20surface.md) _S_ \(also indicated with $\partial V=S$\). If __F__ is a continuously differentiable vector field defined on a [neighborhood](../../../../general/neighbourhood%20(mathematics).md) of _V_, then: $$\iiint _{V}\left(\mathbf {\nabla } \cdot \mathbf {F} \right)\,\mathrm {d} V= \oiint_S (\mathbf {F} \cdot \mathbf {\hat {n} } )\,\mathrm {d} S \,.$$ The left side is a [volume integral](../../../../general/volume%20integral.md) over the volume _V_, and the right side is the [surface integral](../../../../general/surface%20integral.md) over the boundary of the volume _V_. The closed, measurable set $\partial V$ is oriented by outward-pointing [normals](../../../../general/normal%20(geometry).md), and $\mathbf {\hat {n} }$ is the outward pointing unit normal at almost each point on the boundary $\partial V$. <!--SR:!2025-04-24,31,348!2025-04-10,24,388-->
  - divergence theorem / interpretation ::@:: Intuitively, it states that "the sum of all sources of the field in a region \(with sinks regarded as negative sources\) gives the net flux out of the region". <!--SR:!2025-04-10,24,388!2025-04-12,26,388-->
- [Stokes' theorem](../../../../general/Stokes'%20theorem.md) ::@:: The [line integral](../../../../general/line%20integral.md) of a vector field over a loop is equal to the [surface integral](../../../../general/surface%20integral.md) of its _[curl](../../../../general/curl%20(mathematics).md)_ over the enclosed surface. <!--SR:!2025-04-10,24,388!2025-04-13,26,387-->
  - Stokes' theorem / mathematical statement ::@:: Let $\Sigma$ be a smooth oriented surface in $\mathbb {R} ^{3}$ with boundary $\partial \Sigma \equiv \Gamma$. If a vector field $\mathbf {F} (x,y,z)=(F_{x}(x,y,z),F_{y}(x,y,z),F_{z}(x,y,z))$ is defined and has continuous first order [partial derivatives](../../../../general/partial%20derivatives.md) in a region containing $\Sigma$, then $$\iint _{\Sigma }(\nabla \times \mathbf {F} )\cdot \mathrm {d} \mathbf {\Sigma } =\oint _{\partial \Sigma }\mathbf {F} \cdot \mathrm {d} \mathbf {\Gamma } .$$ More explicitly, the equality says that $${\scriptstyle {\begin{aligned}&\iint _{\Sigma }\left(\left({\frac {\partial F_{z} }{\partial y} }-{\frac {\partial F_{y} }{\partial z} }\right)\,\mathrm {d} y\,\mathrm {d} z+\left({\frac {\partial F_{x} }{\partial z} }-{\frac {\partial F_{z} }{\partial x} }\right)\,\mathrm {d} z\,\mathrm {d} x+\left({\frac {\partial F_{y} }{\partial x} }-{\frac {\partial F_{x} }{\partial y} }\right)\,\mathrm {d} x\,\mathrm {d} y\right)\\&=\oint _{\partial \Sigma }{\Bigl (}F_{x}\,\mathrm {d} x+F_{y}\,\mathrm {d} y+F_{z}\,\mathrm {d} z{\Bigr )}.\end{aligned} } }$$ <!--SR:!2025-04-12,26,388!2025-04-03,17,368-->
  - Stokes' theorem / interpretation ::@:: Recall that curl measures the "twist" of vectors in a vector field. If you add all the "twist" in a surface, it equals the "twist" obtained by going around the boundary. <!--SR:!2025-04-10,24,388!2025-04-10,24,388-->
  - Stokes' theorem / note ::@:: Given a closed curve, you can choose any surface satisfying the conditions with the closed curve as a boundary. It does not affect the result. <p> For a closed surface (enclosing a volume), there is no boundary. In that case, the total "twist" is 0. <!--SR:!2025-04-12,26,388!2025-04-10,24,388-->

## week 5 lecture

- datetime: 2025-03-03T09:00:00+08:00/2025-03-03T10:20:00+08:00
- topic: electric conduction and currents
- [magnetostatics](../../../../general/magnetostatics.md) ::@:: It is the study of magnetic fields in systems where the currents are steady (not changing with time). It is the magnetic analogue of electrostatics, where the charges are stationary. <!--SR:!2025-04-11,25,388!2025-04-11,25,388-->
  - magnetostatics / vs. electrostatics ::@:: There are many similarities. The main difference is that while there are free electric monopoles \(free electric charges\), there are no free magnetic monopoles. <p> Thus it does not make sense to have a test magnetic monopole. Rather, we have test magnetic dipoles of magnetic moment __m__, and we calculate its magnetic moment ___τ___ \(see below\). <!--SR:!2025-04-10,24,388!2025-04-12,26,388-->
- [magnetic moment](../../../../general/magnetic%20moment.md) ::@:: It is the combination of strength and orientation of a magnet or other object or system that exerts a magnetic field. The magnetic dipole moment of an object determines the magnitude of torque the object experiences in a given magnetic field. <!--SR:!2025-04-11,25,388!2025-04-11,25,388-->
  - magnetic moment / definition ::@:: The relationship is given by: $${\boldsymbol {\tau } }=\mathbf {m} \times \mathbf {B}$$ where ___τ___ is the torque acting on the dipole, __B__ is the external magnetic field, and __m__ is the magnetic moment. <!--SR:!2025-03-28,13,368!2025-04-03,17,368-->
- [electric current](../../../../general/electric%20current.md) ::@:: It is a flow of charged particles, such as electrons or ions, moving through an electrical conductor or space. It is defined as the net rate of flow of electric charge through a surface. <!--SR:!2025-04-11,25,388!2025-04-12,26,388-->
  - electric current / SI unit ::@:: ampere \(A\) <!--SR:!2025-04-12,26,388!2025-04-12,26,388-->
  - electric current / experiment: electric current and conductivity of ions ::@:: We cannot conduct electricity through deionized \(DI\) water. But we can do so after adding sodium chloride \(NaCl\) to the DI water, which creates ions. <!--SR:!2025-04-11,25,388!2025-04-12,26,388-->
- [current density](../../../../general/current%20density.md) ::@:: It is the amount of charge per unit time that flows through a unit area of a chosen cross section. <!--SR:!2025-04-11,25,388!2025-04-10,24,388-->
  - current density / drift velocity ::@:: The velocity the charges drift at can be calculated from the equation: $$\mathbf J = n q \mathbf v \,,$$ where <p> - $n$ is number of charged particles per unit volume \(or charge carrier density\) <br/> - $\mathbf v$ is the [drift velocity](../../../../general/drift%20velocity.md), and <br/> - $q$ is the charge on each particle. <!--SR:!2025-04-19,26,400!2025-04-10,19,380-->
  - current density / to current through an area ::@:: The [surface integral](../../../../general/surface%20integral.md) of __j__ over a [surface](surface%20(mathematics).md) _S_ gives the total amount of current flowing through the surface: $$I=\iint _{S}\mathbf {j} \cdot \mathbf {\hat {n} } \,dA.$$ More concisely, this is the [flux](flux.md) of __j__ across _S_. <!--SR:!2025-04-10,24,388!2025-04-12,26,388-->
- [continuity equation](../../../../general/continuity%20equation.md) ::@:: It is an equation that describes the transport of some quantity. It is particularly simple and powerful when applied to a conserved quantity, but it can be generalized to apply to any extensive quantity. <!--SR:!2025-04-12,26,388!2025-04-12,26,388-->
  - continuity equation / vs. conservation laws ::@:: They are a stronger, local form of conservation laws. Conservation laws does not rule out the possibility that a quantity could disappear from one point while simultaneously appearing at another point. A stronger statement is that quantity is locally conserved: quantity can neither be created nor destroyed, nor can it "teleport" from one place to another—it can only move by a continuous flow. A continuity equation is the mathematical way to express this kind of statement. <!--SR:!2025-04-12,26,388!2025-04-10,24,388-->
  - continuity equation / integral form ::@:: Mathematically, the integral form of the continuity equation expressing the rate of increase of _q_ within a volume _V_ is: $${\frac {dq}{dt} }+\oint _{S}\mathbf {j} \cdot d\mathbf {S} =\Sigma$$ where <p> - _S_ is any imaginary [closed surface](../../../../general/closed%20surface.md#closed%20surfaces), that encloses a volume _V_, <br/> - $\oint _{S}d\mathbf {S}$ denotes a [surface integral](../../../../general/surface%20integral.md) over that closed surface, <br/> - _q_ is the total amount of the quantity in the volume _V_, <br/> - __j__ is the flux of _q_, <br/> - _t_ is time, <br/> - Σ is the net rate that _q_ is being generated inside the volume _V_ per unit time. <!--SR:!2025-04-11,25,388!2025-04-11,25,388-->
  - continuity equation / differential form ::@:: By the [divergence theorem](../../../../general/divergence%20theorem.md), a general continuity equation can also be written in a "differential form": $${\frac {\partial \rho }{\partial t} }+\nabla \cdot \mathbf {j} =\sigma$$ where <p> - ∇⋅ is [divergence](../../../../general/divergence.md), <br/> - _ρ_ is the density of the amount _q_ \(i.e. the quantity _q_ per unit volume\), <br/> - __j__ is the flux of _q_ \(i.e. __j__ = ρ<!-- markdown separator -->__v__, where __v__ is the vector field describing the movement of the quantity _q_\), <br/> - _t_ is time, <br/> - _σ_ is the generation of _q_ per unit volume per unit time. <!--SR:!2025-04-11,25,388!2025-04-11,25,388-->
  - continuity equation / electromagnetism ::@:: It states that the [divergence](../../../../general/divergence.md) of the [current density](../../../../general/current%20density.md) __J__ \(in [amperes](../../../../general/amperes.md) per square meter\) is equal to the negative rate of change of the [charge density](../../../../general/charge%20density.md) _ρ_ \(in [coulombs](../../../../general/Coulomb.md) per cubic meter\), $$\nabla \cdot \mathbf {J} =-{\frac {\partial \rho }{\partial t} }$$ <!--SR:!2025-04-10,24,388!2025-04-12,26,388-->
- electric current
  - electric current / drift speed ::@:: The speed they drift at can be calculated from the equation: $$I=nAvQ\,,$$ where <p> - $I$ is the electric current <br/> - $n$ is number of charged particles per unit volume \(or charge carrier density\) <br/> - $A$ is the cross-sectional area of the conductor <br/> - $v$ is the [drift velocity](../../../../general/drift%20velocity.md), and <br/> - $Q$ is the charge on each particle. <!--SR:!2025-04-10,24,388!2025-03-25,10,348-->
- continuity equation
  - continuity equation / electromagnetism
    - continuity equation / electromagnetism / stationary ::@:: When $\frac {\partial \rho} {\partial t} = 0$, this is the stationary case. Then we can derive that current remains the same across any cross section of a wire and Kirchhoff's junction rule. <!--SR:!2025-04-12,26,388!2025-04-03,17,368-->
- [Kirchhoff's circuit laws](../../../../general/Kirchhoff's%20circuit%20laws.md) ::@:: They are two equalities that deal with the current and potential difference (commonly known as voltage) in the lumped element model of electrical circuits. They were first described in 1845 by German physicist Gustav Kirchhoff. <!--SR:!2025-04-10,24,388!2025-04-12,26,388-->
  - Kirchhoff's junction rule ::@:: Recalling that current is a signed \(positive or negative\) quantity reflecting direction towards or away from a node, this principle can be succinctly stated as: $$\sum _{i=1}^{n}I_{i}=0$$ where _n_ is the total number of branches with currents flowing towards or away from the node. <!--SR:!2025-04-11,25,388!2025-04-11,25,388-->
- [Ohm's law](Ohm's%20law.md) ::@:: It states that the [electric current](../../../../general/electric%20current.md) through a [conductor](../../../../general/electrical%20conductor.md) between two [points](../../../../general/node%20(circuits).md) is directly [proportional](../../../../general/proportionality%20(mathematics).md) to the [voltage](voltage.md) across the two points. <!--SR:!2025-04-10,24,388!2025-04-13,26,387-->
  - Ohm's law / equations ::@:: Introducing the constant of proportionality, the [resistance](../../../../general/electrical%20resistance.md), one arrives at the three mathematical equations used to describe this relationship: $$V=IR\quad {\text{or} }\quad I={\frac {V}{R} }\quad {\text{or} }\quad R={\frac {V}{I} }$$ where _I_ is the current through the conductor, _V_ is the voltage measured across the conductor and _R_ is the [resistance](../../../../general/electrical%20resistance.md) of the conductor. <!--SR:!2025-04-10,24,388!2025-04-10,24,388-->
  - Ohm's law / validity ::@:: It is an [empirical relation](../../../../general/empirical%20law.md) which accurately describes the conductivity of the vast majority of [electrically conductive materials](../../../../general/electrical%20conductor.md) over many orders of magnitude of current. However some materials do not obey Ohm's law; these are called [non-ohmic](../../../../general/non-ohmic%20resistance.md#static%20and%20differential%20resistance). <!--SR:!2025-04-11,25,388!2025-04-11,25,388-->
    - Ohm's law / validity / examples ::@:: Ohmic resistors obey Ohm's law: typical metal wire at typical temperature, etc. <br/> non-Ohmic resistors do not obey Ohm's law: semiconductor diode \(positive current increases nonlinearly with positive voltage; negative current is very little even with increasing negative voltage\), etc. <!--SR:!2025-04-13,26,387!2025-04-10,24,388-->
  - Ohm's law / vector form ::@:: is also used to refer to various generalizations of the law; for example the [vector](../../../../general/vector%20(mathematics%20and%20physics).md) form of the law used in [electromagnetics](../../../../general/electromagnetics.md) and material science: $$\mathbf {J} =\sigma \mathbf {E} ,$$ where __J__ is the [current density](../../../../general/current%20density.md) at a given location in a resistive material, __E__ is the electric field at that location, and _σ_ \([sigma](../../../../general/sigma.md)\) is a material-dependent parameter called the [conductivity](../../../../general/electrical%20conductivity.md), defined as the [inverse](../../../../general/inverse%20function.md) of [resistivity](../../../../general/electrical%20resistivity%20and%20conductivity.md) _ρ_ \([rho](../../../../general/rho.md)\). <p> In this case, Ohm's law refers to the conductivity _σ_ being independent of the electric field __E__. <!--SR:!2025-04-10,24,388!2025-04-11,25,388-->
- [electrical resistivity and conductivity](../../../../general/electrical%20resistivity%20and%20conductivity.md) ::@:: It is a fundamental [specific property](../../../../general/specific%20property.md) of a material that measures its [electrical resistance](../../../../general/electrical%20resistance.md) or how strongly it resists [electric current](../../../../general/electric%20current.md). A low resistivity indicates a material that readily allows electric current. <!--SR:!2025-04-12,26,388!2025-04-12,26,388-->
  - electrical resistivity and conductivity / range ::@:: Elemental metals, e.g. aluminum and copper, typically are on the order of 10<sup>–8</sup> Ω⋅m. Insulating materials, e.g. glass, typically are on the order of 10<sup>14</sup> Ω⋅m. <!--SR:!2025-04-11,25,388!2025-04-13,26,387-->
  - electrical resistivity and conductivity / SI unit ::@:: ohm metre \(Ω⋅m\), siemens per metre \(S/m\) <!--SR:!2025-04-11,25,388!2025-04-12,26,388-->
  - electrical resistivity and conductivity / Pouillet's law ::@:: Assuming the electric field and electrical resistivity throughout a wire of length $\ell$ and area $A$ is constant. Then we have $$\lvert \mathbf E \rvert = \rho \lvert \mathbf J \rvert \implies \frac V \ell = \rho \frac I A \implies V = \rho \frac \ell A I \,,$$ where $$R = \rho \frac \ell A$$ can be identified as the _electrical resistance_ $R$. The latter equation is known as __Pouillet's law__. <!--SR:!2025-04-12,26,388!2025-04-11,25,388-->

## week 5 lecture 2

- datetime: 2025-03-05T09:00:00+08:00/2025-03-05T10:20:00+08:00
- topic: magnetic forces
- [electromotive force](../../../../general/electromotive%20force.md) \(emf\) ::@:: It is an [energy](../../../../general/energy.md) transfer to an [electric circuit](../../../../general/electric%20circuit.md) per unit of [electric charge](../../../../general/electric%20charge.md), measured in [volts](../../../../general/volt.md). <p> However, electromotive force itself is not a physical force. <!--SR:!2025-04-08,18,373!2025-04-15,25,393-->
  - electromotive force / motivation ::@:: Consider applying an electric field to a conductor. Charges inside would create a current temporarily, which is soon stopped by the build-up of charges at the ends, as the electric field inside the conductor is now zero. This is exactly same as the situation of an ideal conductor in an electric field. <p> For a current to last, the charges must be part of a _closed_ circuit. Additionally, something needs to _push_ it, thus we have electromotive force \(which is not actually a physical force\). <!--SR:!2025-04-17,27,393!2025-04-17,27,393-->
  - electromotive force / sources ::@:: Devices called electrical _[transducers](../../../../general/transducer.md)_ provide an emf by [converting](../../../../general/energy%20transformation.md) other forms of [energy](../../../../general/energy.md) into [electrical energy](../../../../general/electrical%20energy.md). Other types of electrical equipment also produce an emf, such as [batteries](../../../../general/battery%20(electricity).md), which convert [chemical energy](../../../../general/chemical%20energy.md), and [generators](../../../../general/electric%20generator.md), which convert [mechanical energy](../../../../general/mechanical%20energy.md). This energy conversion is achieved by [physical forces](../../../../general/force.md) applying [physical work](../../../../general/work%20(physics).md) on [electric charges](../../../../general/electric%20charge.md). <!--SR:!2025-04-15,25,393!2025-04-08,18,373-->
  - electromotive force / vs. potential difference ::@:: They are formally distinct concepts: <p> - Potential difference is a more general term that includes emf. <br/> - Emf is the cause of a potential difference. <br/> - In a circuit of a voltage source and a resistor, the sum of the source's applied voltage plus the ohmic voltage drop through the resistor is zero. But the resistor provides no emf, only the voltage source does: <br/> &emsp; - For a circuit using a battery source, the emf is due solely to the chemical forces in the battery. <br/> &emsp; - For a circuit using an electric generator, the emf is due solely to a time-varying magnetic forces within the generator. <br/> - Both a 1 volt emf and a 1 volt potential difference correspond to 1 joule per coulomb of charge. <!--SR:!2025-04-16,26,393!2025-04-15,25,393-->
- Kirchhoff's circuit laws
  - Kirchhoff's voltage law ::@:: Similarly to Kirchhoff's current law, the voltage law can be stated as: $$\sum _{i=1}^{n}V_{i}=0$$ Here, _n_ is the total number of voltages measured. <!--SR:!2025-04-16,26,393!2025-04-16,26,393-->
- electromotive force
  - electromotive force / circuit ::@:: In a circuit of a voltage source and a resistor, the sum of the source's applied voltage \(emf\) plus the ohmic voltage drop \(_not_ emf\) through the resistor is zero. <p> That is, when a charge moves through the source, it gains energy. When a charge moves through the resistor, it loses energy. When it finishes a cycle, it has the same energy as it started \(same potential\). <!--SR:!2025-04-08,18,373!2025-04-17,27,393-->
- [internal resistance](../../../../general/internal%20resistance.md) ::@:: In [electrical engineering](../../../../general/electrical%20engineering.md), a practical [electric power source](../../../../general/power%20supply.md) which is a [linear circuit](../../../../general/linear%20circuit.md) may, according to [Thévenin's theorem](../../../../general/Thévenin's%20theorem.md), be represented as an ideal [voltage source](../../../../general/voltage%20source.md) in [series](../../../../general/series%20and%20parallel%20circuits.md) with an [impedance](../../../../general/electrical%20impedance.md). This impedance is termed the __\(this\)__ of the source. <!--SR:!2025-04-17,27,393!2025-04-16,26,393-->
  - internal resistance / impedance ::@:: It is the opposition to [alternating current](../../../../general/alternating%20current.md) presented by the combined effect of [resistance](../../../../general/electrical%20resistance.md) and [reactance](../../../../general/electrical%20reactance.md) in a [circuit](../../../../general/electrical%20circuit.md). \(this course: for simplicity, we only consider resistance right now\) <!--SR:!2025-04-17,27,393!2025-04-17,27,393-->
  - internal resistance / electromotive force ::@:: As a result of internal resistance, the actual potential difference between the terminals of a practical battery is: $$V_{ab} = \varepsilon - Ir \,,$$ where $r$ is its internal resistance. Thus, with a resistor of resistance $R$, we have $\varepsilon - Ir - IR = 0$. <!--SR:!2025-04-15,25,393!2025-04-16,26,393-->
- [Lorentz force](../../../../general/Lorentz%20force.md) ::@:: The __Lorentz force law__ is the combination of electric and magnetic [force](../../../../general/force.md) on a [point charge](../../../../general/point%20charge.md#point%20charge) due to [electromagnetic fields](../../../../general/electromagnetic%20field.md). The __Lorentz force__, on the other hand, is a [physical effect](../../../../general/phenomenon.md) that occurs in the vicinity of electrically neutral, current-carrying conductors causing moving electrical charges to experience a __magnetic force__. <!--SR:!2025-04-15,25,393!2025-04-15,25,393-->
  - Lorentz force / experiment: magnetic force on a current carrying wire ::@:: A permanent magnet applies force on a current carrying wire. Reversing the current direction or the magnet orientation \(but not both at the same time\) reverses the force direction. <!--SR:!2025-04-16,26,393!2025-04-15,25,393-->
  - Lorentz force / experiment: magnetic force on an electric beam ::@:: A permanent magnet deflects an electron beam when the magnetic orientation is not parallel to the beam direction. Reversing the magnet orientation reverses the deflection direction. <!--SR:!2025-04-08,18,373!2025-04-17,27,393-->
  - Lorentz force / equation ::@:: It states that a particle of charge _q_ moving with a velocity __v__ in an [electric field](../../../../general/electric%20field.md) __E__ and a [magnetic field](../../../../general/magnetic%20field.md) __B__ experiences a force \(in [SI units](../../../../general/International%20System%20of%20Units.md) of $$\mathbf {F} =q\left(\mathbf {E} +\mathbf {v} \times \mathbf {B} \right).$$ <!--SR:!2025-04-16,26,393!2025-04-02,13,353-->
    - Lorentz force / equation / interpretation ::@:: It says that the electromagnetic force on a charge _q_ is a combination of \(1\) a force in the direction of the electric field __E__ \(proportional to the magnitude of the field and the quantity of charge\), and \(2\) a force at right angles to both the magnetic field __B__ and the velocity __v__ of the charge \(proportional to the magnitude of the field, the charge, and the velocity\). <p> We also notice that the magnetic force does _not_ do work on electric charges, since it is always perpendicular to the velocity. <!--SR:!2025-04-15,25,393!2025-04-15,25,393-->
- [cyclotron motion](../../../../general/cyclotron%20motion.md) ::@:: It refers to the [circular motion](../../../../general/circular%20motion.md) exhibited by [charged particles](../../../../general/charged%20particle.md) in a uniform [magnetic field](../../../../general/magnetic%20field.md). <!--SR:!2025-04-15,25,393!2025-04-15,25,393-->
  - cyclotron motion / Lorentz force ::@:: If a particle with electric charge $q$ and mass $m$ is moving with velocity ${\vec {v} }$ in a uniform magnetic field ${\vec {B} }$, then it will experience a [Lorentz force](../../../../general/Lorentz%20force.md) given by $${\vec {F} }=q({\vec {v} }\times {\vec {B} }).$$ The direction of the force is given by the [cross product](../../../../general/cross%20product.md) of the velocity and magnetic field. Thus, the Lorentz force will always act perpendicular to the direction of motion, causing the particle to [gyrate](../../../../general/gyration.md), or move in a circle. <!--SR:!2025-04-15,25,393!2025-04-17,27,393-->
  - cyclotron motion / cyclotron radius ::@:: The radius of this circle, $r_{\rm {c} }$, can be determined by equating the magnitude of the Lorentz force to the [centripetal force](../../../../general/centripetal%20force.md) as $${\frac {mv_{\perp }^{2} }{r_{\rm {c} } } }=|q|v_{\perp }B.$$ Rearranging, the cyclotron radius can be expressed as $$r_{\rm {c} }={\frac {mv_{\perp } }{|q|B} }.$$ Thus, the cyclotron radius is [directly proportional](../../../../general/directly%20proportional.md#direct%20proportionality) to the particle mass and perpendicular velocity, while it is inversely proportional to the particle electric charge and the magnetic field strength. <!--SR:!2025-04-02,13,353!2025-04-15,25,393-->
  - cyclotron motion / cyclotron frequency ::@:: The time it takes the particle to complete one revolution, called the [period](../../../../general/frequency.md#definitions%20and%20units), can be calculated to be $$T_{\rm {c} }={\frac {2\pi r_{\rm {c} } }{v_{\perp } } }.$$ The period is the [reciprocal](../../../../general/multiplicative%20inverse.md) of the cyclotron frequency: $$f_{\rm {c} }={\frac {1}{T_{\rm {c} } } }={\frac {|q|B}{2\pi m} }$$ or $$\omega _{\rm {c} }={\frac {|q|B}{m} }.$$ The cyclotron frequency is independent of the radius and velocity and therefore independent of the particle's kinetic energy; in the non-relativistic limit all particles with the same charge-to-mass ratio rotate around magnetic field lines with the same frequency. <!--SR:!2025-04-02,13,353!2025-04-08,19,373-->
  - cyclotron motion / parallel velocity ::@:: The velocity component parallel to the uniform magnetic field is unaffected. <!--SR:!2025-04-16,26,393!2025-04-15,25,393-->
- Lorentz force
  - Lorentz force / Laplace force ::@:: When a wire carrying an electric current is placed in a magnetic field, each of the moving charges, which comprise the current, experiences the Lorentz force, and together they can create a macroscopic force on the wire \(sometimes called the __Laplace force__\). <!--SR:!2025-04-15,25,393!2025-04-08,18,373-->
    - Lorentz force / Laplace force / equation ::@:: If, in addition, the magnetic field is inhomogeneous, the net force on a stationary rigid wire carrying a steady current _I_ is given by integration along the wire, $$\mathbf {F} =I\int \mathrm {d} {\boldsymbol {\ell } }\times \mathbf {B} .$$ \(This assumes the current is the same across the wire, which is typically the case.\) <!--SR:!2025-04-08,18,373!2025-04-02,13,353-->
    - Lorentz force / Laplace force / application ::@:: One application of this is [Ampère's force law](Ampère's%20force%20law.md), which describes how two current-carrying wires can attract or repel each other, since each experiences a Lorentz force from the other's magnetic field. <!--SR:!2025-04-15,25,393!2025-04-08,18,373-->

## week 5 tutorial

- datetime: 2025-03-06T18:00:00+08:00/2025-03-06T18:50:00+08:00
- topic: Drude model
- [Drude model](../../../../general/Drude%20model.md) ::@:: It of [electrical conduction](../../../../general/electrical%20conduction.md) was proposed in 1900 by [Paul Drude](../../../../general/Paul%20Karl%20Ludwig%20Drude.md) to explain the transport properties of [electrons](../../../../general/electron.md) in materials \(especially metals\). <!--SR:!2025-04-08,18,373!2025-04-17,27,393-->
  - Drude model / motivation ::@:: The Drude model attempts to explain the resistivity of a conductor in terms of the scattering of electrons \(the carriers of electricity\) by the relatively immobile ions in the metal that act like obstructions to the flow of electrons. <!--SR:!2025-04-15,25,393!2025-04-16,26,393-->
  - Drude model / description ::@:: The model, which is an application of [kinetic theory](../../../../general/kinetic%20theory%20of%20gases.md), assumes that the microscopic behaviour of electrons in a solid may be treated classically and behaves much like a [pinball](../../../../general/pinball.md) machine, with a sea of constantly jittering electrons bouncing and re-bouncing off heavier, relatively immobile positive ions. <!--SR:!2025-04-16,26,393!2025-04-08,19,373-->
  - Drude model / mathematical treatment
    - Drude model / mathematical treatment / DC field ::@:: The simplest analysis of the Drude model assumes that electric field __E__ is both uniform and constant, and that the thermal velocity of electrons is sufficiently high such that they accumulate only an infinitesimal amount of momentum _d_<!-- markdownlint MD028 -->__p__ between collisions, which occur on average every _τ_ seconds. <!--SR:!2025-04-15,25,393!2025-04-15,25,393-->
      - Drude model / mathematical treatment / DC field / derivation ::@:: Then an electron isolated at time _t_ will on average have been travelling for time _τ_ since its last collision, and consequently will have accumulated momentum $$\Delta \langle \mathbf {p} \rangle =q\mathbf {E} \tau .$$ During its last collision, this electron will have been just as likely to have bounced forward as backward, so all prior contributions to the electron's momentum may be ignored, resulting in the expression $$\langle \mathbf {p} \rangle =q\mathbf {E} \tau .$$ Substituting the relations $${\begin{aligned}\langle \mathbf {p} \rangle &=m\langle \mathbf {v} \rangle ,\\\mathbf {J} &=nq\langle \mathbf {v} \rangle ,\end{aligned} }$$ results in the formulation of Ohm's law mentioned above: $$\mathbf {J} =\left({\frac {nq^{2}\tau }{m} }\right)\mathbf {E} \,,$$ where $n$ is number of charged particles per unit volume \(or charge carrier density\), $q$ is the charge on each particle, and $m$ is the mass of each particle. <!--SR:!2025-03-31,11,333!2025-04-08,19,373-->
      - Drude model / mathematical treatment / DC field / conductivity ::@:: The material can be shown to satisfy Ohm's law $\mathbf {J} =\sigma _{0}\mathbf {E}$ with a [DC](../../../../general/direct%20current.md)-conductivity _σ_<sub>0</sub>: $$\sigma _{0}={\frac {nq^{2}\tau }{m} } \,,$$ where $n$ is number of charged particles per unit volume \(or charge carrier density\), $q$ is the charge on each particle, and $m$ is the mass of each particle. <p> We can see materials with more charge carriers \(higher $n$\), e.g. metals, are more conductive, as opposed to, e.g. insulators. <p> We also see materials with higher collision time $\tau$, e.g. _elemental_ metals, are more conductive, as opposed to, e.g. alloys, which have more disorder. <!--SR:!2025-04-08,19,373!2025-04-08,19,373-->
- [network analysis](../../../../general/network%20analysis%20(electrical%20circuits).md) ::@:: It is the process of finding the [voltages](../../../../general/voltage.md) across, and the [currents](../../../../general/electric%20current.md) through, all network components. There are many techniques for calculating these values; however, for the most part, the techniques assume [linear](../../../../general/linear%20circuit.md) components. Except where stated, the methods described in this article are applicable only to _linear_ network analysis. <!--SR:!2025-04-15,25,393!2025-04-17,27,393-->
  - network analysis / note ::@:: In this course, we consider resistance only instead of impedance for now when doing network analysis. <!--SR:!2025-04-16,26,393!2025-04-17,27,393-->
  - network analysis / series, parallel ::@:: Some two terminal network of impedances can eventually be reduced to a single impedance by successive applications of impedances in series or impedances in parallel. <p> - Impedances in [series](../../../../general/series%20and%20parallel%20circuits.md#series%20circuits): $$Z_{\mathrm {eq} }=Z_{1}+Z_{2}+\,\cdots \,+Z_{n}.$$ <br/> - Impedances in [parallel](../../../../general/series%20and%20parallel%20circuits.md#parallel%20circuits): $${\frac {1}{Z_{\mathrm {eq} } } }={\frac {1}{Z_{1} } }+{\frac {1}{Z_{2} } }+\,\cdots \,+{\frac {1}{Z_{n} } }.$$ <!--SR:!2025-04-16,26,393!2025-04-16,26,393-->
  - network analysis / Kirchhoff's circuit laws ::@:: There are complicated circuits that cannot be reduced by using only series and parallel transformations. To analyze such circuits, we consider as a network of loops and junctions, and apply Kirchhoff's circuit laws on it. <p> \(The concrete steps involved are complex and is not listed here.\) <!--SR:!2025-04-17,27,393!2025-04-16,26,393-->
- [nodal analysis](../../../../general/nodal%20analysis.md) ::@:: It is a method of determining the voltage (potential difference) between "nodes" (points where elements or branches connect) in an electrical circuit in terms of the branch currents. <p> It is essentially a systematic application of Kirchhoff's current law (KCL) for circuit analysis. <!--SR:!2025-04-17,27,393!2025-04-15,25,393-->
- [mesh analysis](../../../../general/mesh%20analysis.md) ::@:: It is a circuit analysis method for planar circuits. Planar circuits are circuits that can be drawn on a plane surface with no wires crossing each other. A more general technique, called _loop analysis_ (with the corresponding network variables called _loop currents_) can be applied to any circuit, planar or not. <p> It makes systematic use of Kirchhoff’s voltage law to arrive at a set of equations guaranteed to be solvable if the circuit has a solution. <!--SR:!2025-04-16,26,393!2025-04-08,18,373-->

## week 6 lecture

> Dear Student,
>
> please be reminded that I am on a duty trip out of Hong Kong. Tomorrow, the lecture will be used for a flipped class room session during which you have the chance to practice your problem solving skills under the guidance of our TA \[redacted\]. The problem sets will be available on Canvas tomorrow morning and they are comparable to the problems that you will find in the midterm exam. So this is a good practice and I encourage you make use of this opportunity.
>
> Best,
>
> \[redacted\]

- datetime: 2025-03-10T09:00:00+08:00/2025-03-10T10:20:00+08:00
- topic: flipped classroom

## week 6 lecture 2

- datetime: 2025-03-12T09:00:00+08:00/2025-03-12T10:20:00+08:00
- status: unscheduled

## week 6 tutorial

- datetime: 2025-03-13T18:00:00+08:00/2025-03-13T18:50:00+08:00
- status: unscheduled

## final examination

## aftermath

### total
