---
aliases:
  - conjunction/disjunction duality
tags:
  - flashcard/active/general/eng/conjunction_disjunction_duality
  - language/in/English
---

# conjunction/disjunction duality

In [propositional logic](propositional%20calculus.md) and [Boolean algebra](Boolean%20algebra.md), there is a {@{__duality between [conjunction](logical%20conjunction.md) and [disjunction](logical%20disjunction.md)__,<sup>[\[1\]](#^ref-1)</sup><sup>[\[2\]](#^ref-2)</sup><sup>[\[3\]](#^ref-3)</sup> also called the __duality principle__}@}.<sup>[\[4\]](#^ref-4)</sup><sup>[\[5\]](#^ref-5)</sup><sup>[\[6\]](#^ref-6)</sup> It is, undoubtedly, {@{the most widely known example of duality in logic}@}.<sup>[\[1\]](#^ref-1)</sup> The duality consists in these [metalogical](metalogic.md) theorems: <!--SR:!2026-12-23,638,330!2025-10-18,311,330-->

- In [classical](classical%20logic.md) propositional logic, the connectives for [conjunction](logical%20conjunction.md) and [disjunction](logical%20disjunction.md) can be {@{defined in terms of each other, and consequently, only one of them needs to be taken as primitive}@}.<sup>[\[4\]](#^ref-4)</sup><sup>[\[1\]](#^ref-1)</sup>
- If $\varphi ^{D}$ is used as notation to {@{designate the result of replacing every instance of conjunction with disjunction, and every instance of disjunction with conjunction (e.g. $p\land q$ with $q\lor p$, or vice-versa), in a given formula $\varphi$}@}, and if ${\overline {\varphi } }$ is used as notation for {@{replacing every [sentence-letter](propositional%20variable.md) in $\varphi$ with its negation (e.g., $p$ with $\neg p$)}@}, and if the symbol $\models$ is used for {@{semantic consequence and ⟚ for semantical equivalence between logical formulas}@}, then it is demonstrable that {@{$\varphi ^{D}$ ⟚ $\neg {\overline {\varphi } }$,<sup>[\[4\]](#^ref-4)</sup><sup>[\[7\]](#^ref-7)</sup><sup>[\[6\]](#^ref-6)</sup> and also that $\varphi \models \psi$ if, and only if, $\psi ^{D}\models \varphi ^{D}$,<sup>[\[7\]](#^ref-7)</sup> and furthermore that if $\varphi$ ⟚ $\psi$ then $\varphi ^{D}$ ⟚ $\psi ^{D}$}@}.<sup>[\[7\]](#^ref-7)</sup> (In this context, ${\overline {\varphi } }^{D}$ is called {@{the _dual_ of a formula $\varphi$}@}. In some other context, {@{$\varphi^D$ (without negating the sentence-letters) may be also called the _dual_ of a formula $\varphi$ instead}@}.)<sup>[\[4\]](#^ref-4)</sup><sup>[\[5\]](#^ref-5)</sup> <!--SR:!2025-09-07,279,330!2026-05-22,462,310!2025-04-30,172,310!2025-05-01,174,310!2025-06-16,197,310!2025-09-12,282,330!2026-12-26,639,330-->

This article will prove these results, in the [§ mutual definability](#mutual%20definability) and [§ negation is semantically equivalent to dual](#negation%20is%20semantically%20equivalent%20to%20dual) sections respectively.

## mutual definability

Because of {@{their [semantics](semantics%20of%20logic.md), i.e. the way they are commonly interpreted in classical propositional logic}@}, conjunction and disjunction can be defined {@{in terms of each other with the aid of [negation](negation.md), so that consequently, only one of them needs to be taken as primitive}@}.<sup>[\[4\]](#^ref-4)</sup><sup>[\[1\]](#^ref-1)</sup> For example, if {@{conjunction (∧) and negation (¬) are taken as primitives}@}, then disjunction (∨) can be defined as follows:<sup>[\[1\]](#^ref-1)</sup><sup>[\[8\]](#^ref-8)</sup> {@{$$\varphi \lor \psi :\equiv \neg (\neg \varphi \land \neg \psi ) \qquad (1)$$}@}. <!--SR:!2025-07-05,227,330!2025-06-14,209,310!2025-04-28,172,310!2025-08-25,268,330-->

Alternatively, if {@{disjunction is taken as primitive}@}, then conjunction can be defined as follows:<sup>[\[1\]](#^ref-1)</sup><sup>[\[9\]](#^ref-9)</sup><sup>[\[8\]](#^ref-8)</sup> {@{$$\varphi \land \psi :\equiv \neg (\neg \varphi \lor \neg \psi ) \qquad (2)$$}@}. <!--SR:!2025-09-02,274,330!2025-09-24,291,330-->

Also, each of these equivalences can be {@{derived from the other one}@}; for example, if {@{(1) is taken as primitive}@}, then (2) is obtained as follows:<sup>[\[1\]](#^ref-1)</sup> {@{$$\neg (\neg \varphi \lor \neg \psi )\equiv \neg \neg (\neg \neg \varphi \land \neg \neg \psi )\equiv \varphi \land \psi \qquad (3)$$}@}. <!--SR:!2025-10-20,312,330!2025-04-07,157,310!2025-10-03,299,330-->

### functional completeness

Since {@{the [Disjunctive Normal Form Theorem](disjunctive%20normal%20form.md) shows that the set of connectives $\{\land ,\lor ,\neg \}$ is [functionally complete](functional%20completeness.md)}@}, these results show that {@{the sets of connectives $\{\land ,\neg \}$ and $\{\lor ,\neg \}$ are themselves functionally complete as well}@}. <!--SR:!2025-06-06,202,310!2025-05-14,185,310-->

### De Morgan's laws

[De Morgan's laws](De%20Morgan's%20laws.md) also {@{follow from the definitions of these connectives in terms of each other, whichever direction is taken to do it}@}.<sup>[\[1\]](#^ref-1)</sup> If {@{conjunction is taken as primitive}@}, then (4) follows immediately from (1), while (5) follows from (1) via (3):<sup>[\[1\]](#^ref-1)</sup> {@{$$\begin{aligned} \neg (\varphi \lor \psi ) & \equiv \neg \varphi \land \neg \psi \qquad (4) \\ \neg (\varphi \land \psi ) & \equiv \neg \varphi \lor \neg \psi \qquad (5) \end{aligned}$$}@}. <!--SR:!2026-04-05,423,310!2025-04-09,160,310!2025-10-25,316,330-->

## negation is semantically equivalent to dual

__Theorem:__<sup>[\[4\]](#^ref-4)</sup><sup>[\[7\]](#^ref-7)</sup> Let $X$ be {@{any sentence in ${\mathcal {L} }[A_{1},\ldots ,A_{n};\land ,\lor ,\neg ]$. (That is, the language with the [propositional variables](propositional%20variable.md) $A_{1},\ldots ,A_{n}$ and the [connectives](logical%20connective.md) $\{\land ,\lor ,\neg \}$.)}@} Let ${\overline {X} }^{D}$ be {@{obtained from $X$ by replacing every occurrence of $\land$ in $X$ by $\lor$, every occurrence of $\lor$ by $\land$, and every occurrence of $A_{i}$ by $\neg A_{i}$}@}. Then {@{$X$ ⟚ $\neg {\overline {X} }^{D}$}@}. (${\overline {X} }^{D}$ is {@{called the dual of $X$}@}. In some other context, {@{$X^D$ (without negating the propositional variables) may also be called the dual of $X$ instead}@}.) <!--SR:!2025-08-23,266,330!2025-04-30,174,310!2025-09-08,279,330!2025-08-29,272,330!2026-11-06,600,330-->

__Proof:__<sup>[\[4\]](#^ref-4)</sup><sup>[\[7\]](#^ref-7)</sup> A sentence $X$ of ${\mathcal {L} }$, where ${\mathcal {L} }$ is as in the theorem, {@{will be said to have the property $P$ if $X$ ⟚ $\neg {\overline {X} }^{D}$}@}. We shall {@{[prove by induction](mathematical%20induction.md) on immediate predecessors that all sentences of ${\mathcal {L} }$ have $P$}@}. (An _immediate predecessor_ of a [well-formed formula](well-formed%20formula.md) is {@{any of the formulas that are connected by its [dominant connective](glossary%20of%20logic.md#dominant%20connective); it follows that [sentence letters](propositional%20variable.md) have no immediate predecessors}@}.) So we have to {@{establish that the following two conditions are satisfied: (1) each $A_{i}$ has $P$; and (2) for any non-atomic $X$, from the inductive hypothesis that the immediate predecessors of $X$ have $P$, it follows that $X$ does also}@}. <!--SR:!2025-07-30,247,330!2025-09-27,294,330!2025-08-14,259,330!2025-07-28,246,330-->

1. Each $A_{i}$ {@{clearly has no occurrence of $\lor$ or $\land$, and so ${\overline {A_{i} } }^{D}$ is just $\neg A_{i}$}@}. So showing that $A_{i}$ has $P$ merely requires {@{showing that $A_{i}\Leftrightarrow \neg \neg A_{i}$, which [we know to be the case](double%20negation.md)}@}.
2. The induction step is {@{an argument by cases}@}. If {@{$X$ is not an $A_{i}$}@} then {@{$X$ must have one of the following three forms: (i) $X=Y\lor Z$, (ii) $X=Y\land Z$, or (iii) $X=\neg Y$ where $Y$ and $Z$ are sentences of ${\mathcal {L} }$}@}. If $X$ is of the form (i) or (ii) it has as immediate predecessors {@{$Y$ and $Z$, while if it is of the form (iii) it has the one immediate predecessor $Y$}@}. We shall {@{check that the induction step holds in each of the cases}@}.
    1. $Y \lor Z$ ::@:: Suppose that $Y$ and $Z$ each have $P$, i.e. that $Y$ ⟚ $\neg {\overline {Y} }^{D}$ and $Z$ ⟚ $\neg {\overline {Z} }^{D}$. This supposition, recall, is the [inductive hypothesis](mathematical%20induction.md#description). From this we infer that $Y\lor Z$ ⟚ $\neg {\overline {Y} }^{D}\lor \neg {\overline {Z} }^{D}$. By [de Morgan's Laws](De%20Morgan's%20laws.md) $\neg {\overline {Y} }^{D}\lor \neg {\overline {Z} }^{D}$ ⟚ $\lnot ({\overline {Y} }^{D}\land {\overline {Z} }^{D})$. But ${\overline {Y} }^{D}\land {\overline {Z} }^{D}={\overline {(Y\lor Z)} }^{D}$, and $Y\lor Z=X$. So it has been shown that the inductive hypothesis implies that $X$ ⟚ $\neg {\overline {X} }^{D}$, i.e. $X$ has $P$ as required. <!--SR:!2025-08-14,260,330!2026-02-18,391,310-->
    2. $Y \land Z$ ::@:: We have the same inductive hypothesis as in (i). So again $Y$ ⟚ $\neg {\overline {Y} }^{D}$ and $Z$ ⟚ $\neg {\overline {Z} }^{D}$. Hence $Y\land Z\Leftrightarrow \neg {\overline {Y} }^{D}\land \neg {\overline {Z} }^{D}$. By de Morgan again, $\neg {\overline {Y} }^{D}\land \neg {\overline {Z} }^{D}$ ⟚ $\neg ({\overline {Y} }^{D}\lor {\overline {Z} }^{D})$. But ${\overline {Y} }^{D}\lor {\overline {Z} }^{D}={\overline {(Y\land Z)} }^{D}={\overline {X} }^{D}$. So $X$ ⟚ $\neg {\overline {X} }^{D}$ in this case too. <!--SR:!2025-08-10,257,330!2025-05-11,181,310-->
    3. $\lnot Y$ ::@:: Here the inductive hypothesis is simply that $Y$ ⟚ $\neg {\overline {Y} }^{D}$. Hence $\neg Y$ ⟚ $\neg \neg {\overline {Y} }^{D}$. But $\neg {\overline {Y} }^{D}={\overline {\neg Y} }^{D}={\overline {X} }^{D}$. Hence $X$ ⟚ $\lnot {\overline {X} }^{D}$. [Q.E.D.](Q.E.D..md) <!--SR:!2025-05-13,185,310!2025-07-12,233,330-->

> [!tip] tips
>
> - intuition for that negation is semantically equivalent to dual ::@:: Usually, we represent "false" (semantically) by $0$ (syntactically) and "true" by $1$. Now imagine a separate, weird world where we represent "false" by $1$ and "true" by $0$. Their conjunction $\land'$ (the prime superscript $'$ to denote that this is _in their world_) has the following truth table, which can be obtained by replacing $0$ with $1$ and $1$ with $0$ in the truth table of our conjunction $\land$: $$\begin{aligned} (1, 1) & \mapsto 1 \\ (0, 1) & \mapsto 1 \\ (1, 0) & \mapsto 1 \\ (0, 0) & \mapsto 0 \end{aligned}$$. But this is clearly the disjunction $\lor$ in our world, so $\land' = \lor$. Their disjunction $\lor'$ has the following truth table, which can be obtained by replacing $0$ with $1$ and $1$ with $0$ in the truth table of our disjunction $\lor$: $$\begin{aligned} (1, 1) & \mapsto 1 \\ (0, 1) & \mapsto 0 \\ (1, 0) & \mapsto 0 \\ (0, 0) & \mapsto 0 \end{aligned}$$. But this is clearly conjunction $\land$ in our world, so $\lor' = \land$. Now, if we have a proposition $X$ _in our world_, we can convert it into a proposition _in their world_. First, replace the atomic propositions (terms without conjunctions, disjunctions, or negation) by their negations, since "true" positions that are $1$ _in our world_ are $0$ _in their world_, and vice versa. Denote this $\overline X$. The next step is replacing conjunctions $\land$ by disjunctions $\lor$, and disjunctions $\lor$ by conjunctions $\land$, by the above two truth tables. Denote this $\overline X^D$. $\overline X^D$ is called the _dual_ of the proposition $X$. Finally, $\overline X^D$ has a truth value represented by $0$ and $1$ _in their world_, and we can convert this truth value back into _our world_ by negating it: $\lnot \overline X^D$. Hence, $X \equiv \lnot \overline X^D$. <!--SR:!2026-04-15,433,310!2025-04-25,173,310-->

### further duality theorems

Assume {@{$\phi \models \psi$}@}. Then {@{${\overline {\phi } }\models {\overline {\psi } }$ by uniform substitution of $\neg P_{i}$ for $P_{i}$. Hence, $\neg \overline \psi \models \neg \overline \phi$, [by contraposition](contraposition.md#proof%20by%20contrapositive)}@}; so finally, {@{$\psi ^{D}\models \phi ^{D}$, by the property that $\varphi ^{D}$ ⟚ $\neg {\overline {\varphi } }$, which was just proved above}@}.<sup>[\[7\]](#^ref-7)</sup> And since {@{$\varphi ^{DD}=\varphi$}@}, it is also true that {@{$\varphi \models \psi$ if, and only if, $\psi ^{D}\models \phi ^{D}$}@}.<sup>[\[7\]](#^ref-7)</sup> And it follows, as a corollary, that if $\phi \models \neg \psi$, then {@{$\neg \psi ^{D} \models \phi ^{D}$}@}.<sup>[\[7\]](#^ref-7)</sup> <!--SR:!2025-08-30,272,330!2026-08-06,519,310!2025-04-09,160,310!2025-06-28,205,310!2025-04-30,140,250!2026-07-15,495,310-->

## conjunctive and disjunctive normal forms

- see: [conjunctive normal form](conjunctive%20normal%20form.md), [disjunctive normal form](disjunctive%20normal%20form.md)

For {@{a formula $\varphi$ in [disjunctive normal form](disjunctive%20normal%20form.md)}@}, {@{the formula ${\overline {\varphi } }^{D}$ will be in [conjunctive normal form](conjunctive%20normal%20form.md)}@}, and {@{given the result that [§ negation is semantically equivalent to dual](#negation%20is%20semantically%20equivalent%20to%20dual), it will be semantically equivalent to $\neg \varphi$}@}.<sup>[\[10\]](#^ref-10)</sup><sup>[\[11\]](#^ref-11)</sup> This provides {@{a procedure for converting between conjunctive normal form and disjunctive normal form}@}.<sup>[\[12\]](#^ref-12)</sup> Since {@{the [Disjunctive Normal Form Theorem](disjunctive%20normal%20form.md#Disjunctive%20Normal%20Form%20Theorem) shows that every formula of propositional logic is expressible in disjunctive normal form}@}, every formula is {@{also expressible in conjunctive normal form by means of effecting the conversion to its dual}@}.<sup>[\[11\]](#^ref-11)</sup> <!--SR:!2025-08-05,253,330!2025-07-15,235,330!2026-04-10,393,290!2025-10-01,298,330!2025-06-10,171,270!2026-02-28,362,290-->

## references

This text incorporates [content](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/conjunction/disjunction_duality) from [Wikipedia](Wikipedia.md) available under the [CC BY-SA 4.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/) license.

1. ["Duality in Logic and Language | Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy"](https://iep.utm.edu/duality-in-logic-and-language/). Retrieved 2024-06-10. <a id="^ref-1"></a>^ref-1
2. ["1.1 Logical Operations"](https://www.whitman.edu/mathematics/higher_math_online/section01.01.html). _<www.whitman.edu>_. Retrieved 2024-06-10. <a id="^ref-2"></a>^ref-2
3. Look, Brandon C. (2014-09-25). [_The Bloomsbury Companion to Leibniz_](https://books.google.com/books?id=NDRuBAAAQBAJ). Bloomsbury Publishing. p. 127. [ISBN](ISBN.md) [978-1-4725-2485-0](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:BookSources/978-1-4725-2485-0). <a id="^ref-3"></a>^ref-3
4. Howson, Colin (1997). _Logic with trees: an introduction to symbolic logic_. London ; New York: Routledge. pp. 41, 44–45. [ISBN](ISBN.md) [978-0-415-13342-5](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:BookSources/978-0-415-13342-5). <a id="^ref-4"></a>^ref-4
5. ["Boolean algebra, Part 1 | Review ICS 241"](https://courses.ics.hawaii.edu/ReviewICS241/morea/boolean-algebra/readings-boolean-algebra-1.html). _courses.ics.hawaii.edu_. Retrieved 2024-06-10. <a id="^ref-5"></a>^ref-5
6. Kurki-Suonio, R. (2005-07-20). [_A Practical Theory of Reactive Systems: Incremental Modeling of Dynamic Behaviors_](https://books.google.com/books?id=EvwYxKptVmEC). Springer Science & Business Media. pp. 80–81. [ISBN](ISBN.md) [978-3-540-27348-6](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:BookSources/978-3-540-27348-6). <a id="^ref-6"></a>^ref-6
7. Bostock, David (1997). _Intermediate logic_. Oxford : New York: Clarendon Press ; Oxford University Press. pp. 62–65. [ISBN](ISBN.md) [978-0-19-875141-0](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:BookSources/978-0-19-875141-0). <a id="^ref-7"></a>^ref-7
8. Makridis, Odysseus (2022). _Symbolic logic_. Palgrave philosophy today. Cham, Switzerland: Palgrave Macmillan. p. 133. [ISBN](ISBN.md) [978-3-030-67395-6](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:BookSources/978-3-030-67395-6). <a id="^ref-8"></a>^ref-8
9. Lyons, John (1977-06-02). [_Semantics: Volume 1_](https://books.google.com/books?id=jQA6wVLCINUC). Cambridge University Press. p. 145. [ISBN](ISBN.md) [978-0-521-29165-1](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:BookSources/978-0-521-29165-1). <a id="^ref-9"></a>^ref-9
10. Robinson, Alan J. A.; Voronkov, Andrei (2001-06-21). [_Handbook of Automated Reasoning_](https://books.google.com/books?id=X3z8ujBRgmEC). Gulf Professional Publishing. p. 306. [ISBN](ISBN.md) [978-0-444-82949-8](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:BookSources/978-0-444-82949-8). <a id="^ref-10"></a>^ref-10
11. Polkowski, Lech T. (2023-10-03). [_Logic: Reference Book for Computer Scientists: The 2nd Revised, Modified, and Enlarged Edition of "Logics for Computer and Data Sciences, and Artificial Intelligence"_](https://books.google.com/books?id=eO3aEAAAQBAJ). Springer Nature. p. 70. [ISBN](ISBN.md) [978-3-031-42034-4](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:BookSources/978-3-031-42034-4). <a id="^ref-11"></a>^ref-11
12. Bagdasar, Ovidiu (2013-10-28). [_Concise Computer Mathematics: Tutorials on Theory and Problems_](https://books.google.com/books?id=8lS6BAAAQBAJ). Springer Science & Business Media. p. 36. [ISBN](ISBN.md) [978-3-319-01751-8](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:BookSources/978-3-319-01751-8). <a id="^ref-12"></a>^ref-12
