---
aliases:
  - market economies
  - market economy
tags:
  - flashcard/active/general/eng/market_economy
  - language/in/English
---

# market economy

A __market economy__ is {@{an [economic system](economic%20system.md) in which the decisions regarding [investment](fixed%20investment.md), [production](production%20(economics).md), and [distribution](distribution%20(economics).md) to the consumers are guided by the [price signals](price%20signal.md) created by the forces of [supply and demand](supply%20and%20demand.md)}@}. The major characteristic of a market economy is {@{the existence of [factor markets](factor%20market.md) that play a dominant role in the allocation of [capital](capital%20(economics).md)}@} and {@{the [factors of production](factors%20of%20production.md)}@}.<sup>[\[1\]](#^ref-1)</sup><sup>[\[2\]](#^ref-2)</sup> <!--SR:!2027-01-24,644,330!2026-10-10,567,330!2029-06-27,1352,350-->

Market economies range from {@{minimally regulated [free-market](free%20market.md) and _[laissez-faire](laissez-faire.md)_ systems}@} where {@{state activity is restricted to providing [public goods](public%20good%20(economics).md) and [services](public%20service.md) and safeguarding private ownership}@},<sup>[\[3\]](#^ref-3)</sup> to {@{[interventionist](market%20intervention.md) forms}@} where {@{the government plays an active role in correcting [market failures](market%20failure.md) and promoting [social welfare](welfare%20spending.md)}@}. {@{State-directed or [dirigist](dirigisme.md) economies}@} are those where {@{the state plays a directive role in guiding the overall development of the market through [industrial policies](industrial%20policy.md) or [indicative planning](indicative%20planning.md)}@}—which {@{guides yet does not substitute the market for [economic planning](economic%20planning.md)}@}—a form sometimes referred to as {@{a [mixed economy](mixed%20economy.md)}@}.<sup>[\[4\]](#^ref-4)</sup><sup>[\[5\]](#^ref-5)</sup> <!--SR:!2028-06-29,1064,350!2027-04-11,704,330!2027-10-24,845,330!2029-06-20,1346,350!2026-04-28,419,310!2025-11-08,316,330!2028-01-28,919,330!2029-02-14,1246,350-->

Market economies are contrasted with {@{[planned economies](planned%20economy.md) where investment and production decisions are embodied in an integrated economy-wide economic plan}@}. In {@{a [centrally planned economy](planned%20economy.md#central%20planning)}@}, economic planning is {@{the principal allocation mechanism between firms rather than markets}@}, with {@{the economy's [means of production](means%20of%20production.md)}@} being {@{owned and operated by a single organizational body}@}. <!--SR:!2026-01-06,348,310!2029-02-09,1242,350!2026-04-11,419,310!2028-12-14,1198,350!2028-06-30,1065,350-->

## characteristics

### property rights

For {@{market economies to function efficiently}@}, governments must {@{establish clearly defined and enforceable [property rights](right%20to%20property.md) for assets and capital goods}@}. However, property rights do not {@{specifically mean private property rights}@} and market economies do not {@{logically presuppose the existence of [private ownership](private%20property.md) of the [means of production](means%20of%20production.md)}@}. Market economies {@{can and often do include various types of [cooperatives](cooperative.md) or autonomous [state-owned enterprises](state-owned%20enterprise.md)}@} that {@{acquire [capital goods](capital%20(economics).md) and raw materials in [capital markets](capital%20market.md)}@}. These enterprises utilize {@{a market-determined free price system to allocate capital goods and labor}@}.<sup>[\[6\]](#^ref-6)</sup> In addition, there are {@{many variations of [market socialism](market%20socialism.md)}@} where {@{the majority of capital assets are socially owned with markets allocating resources between socially owned firms}@}. These models range from {@{systems based on [employee-owned enterprises](worker%20cooperative.md) based on [self-management](workers'%20self-management.md)}@} to {@{a combination of public ownership of the [means of production](means%20of%20production.md) with [factor markets](factor%20market.md)}@}.<sup>[\[7\]](#^ref-7)</sup> <!--SR:!2025-11-06,314,330!2027-03-30,693,330!2027-06-30,768,330!2028-11-07,1167,350!2026-11-08,564,310!2028-03-26,960,330!2028-07-16,1078,350!2029-07-02,1355,350!2027-11-19,816,290!2027-09-15,816,330!2028-01-31,920,330-->

### supply and demand

{@{Supply and demand}@} supposedly {@{work in tandem}@}. {@{The economic theory}@} is that {@{supply slopes upwards as people buy more}@} and {@{demand drops as prices rise and people buy less}@}.<sup>[\[8\]](#^ref-8)</sup> <!--SR:!2028-07-13,1076,350!2026-12-30,630,330!2029-07-10,1362,350!2025-11-15,24,371!2025-11-14,23,371-->

Market economies rely upon {@{a price system to signal market actors to adjust production and investment}@}. Price formation relies on {@{the interaction of supply and demand to reach or approximate an equilibrium}@} where {@{the unit price for a particular good or service is at a point where the quantity demanded equals the quantity supplied}@}. <!--SR:!2029-09-30,1425,350!2028-01-19,869,330!2029-07-01,1355,350-->

{@{The price data point where the supply and demand lines intersect}@} is called {@{the [market-clearing price](market%20clearing.md)}@}.<sup>[\[8\]](#^ref-8)</sup> <!--SR:!2028-07-26,1087,350!2029-09-22,1418,350-->

Governments can intervene by {@{establishing [price ceilings](price%20ceiling.md) or price floors in specific markets}@} \(such as {@{[minimum wage](minimum%20wage.md) laws}@} in the labor market\), or use {@{[fiscal policy](fiscal%20policy.md) to discourage certain consumer behavior or to address market externalities generated by certain transactions}@} \({@{[Pigovian taxes](Pigouvian%20tax.md)}@}\). {@{Different perspectives exist}@} on {@{the role of government}@} in both {@{regulating and guiding market economies and in addressing social inequalities produced by markets}@}. Fundamentally, {@{a market economy}@} requires that {@{a price system affected by supply and demand}@} exists as {@{the primary mechanism for allocating resources irrespective of the level of regulation}@}. <!--SR:!2027-09-16,816,330!2027-12-24,836,290!2026-01-13,322,290!2026-11-09,566,310!2026-01-16,100,380!2026-01-17,101,380!2026-01-18,102,380!2026-01-17,101,380!2026-01-15,99,380!2026-01-18,102,380-->

## references

This text incorporates [content](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/market_economy) from [Wikipedia](Wikipedia.md) available under the [CC BY-SA 4.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/) license.

1. Gregory and Stuart, Paul & Robert (2004). _Comparing Economic Systems in the Twenty-First Century_ (7th ed.). George Hoffman. p. 538. [ISBN](ISBN.md) [0618261818](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:BookSources/0618261818). Market Economy: Economy in which fundamentals of supply and demand provide signals regarding resource utilization. <a id="^ref-1"></a>^ref-1
2. Altvater, E. (1993). [_The Future of the Market: An Essay on the Regulation of Money and Nature After the Collapse of "Actually Existing Socialism_](https://archive.org/details/futureofmarketes0000altv). Verso. p. [57](https://archive.org/details/futureofmarketes0000altv/page/57). <a id="^ref-2"></a>^ref-2
3. Yu-Shan Wu (1995). _Comparative Economic Transformations: Mainland China, Hungary, the Soviet Union, and Taiwan_. Stanford University Press. p. 8. In laissez-faire capitalism, the state restricts itself to providing public goods and services that the economy cannot generate by itself and to safeguarding private ownership and the smooth operation of the self-regulating market. <a id="^ref-3"></a>^ref-3
4. Altvater, E. (1993). [_The Future of the Market: An Essay on the Regulation of Money and Nature After the Collapse of "Actually Existing Socialism_](https://archive.org/details/futureofmarketes0000altv). Verso. pp. [237](https://archive.org/details/futureofmarketes0000altv/page/237)–238. <a id="^ref-4"></a>^ref-4
5. Tucker, Irvin B. p 491. Macroeconomics for Today. West Publishing. p. 491 <a id="^ref-5"></a>^ref-5
6. Paul M. Johnson (2005). ["A Glossary of Political Economy Terms, Market economy"](https://web.archive.org/web/20121227012016/http://www.auburn.edu/~johnspm/gloss/market_economy). Auburn University. Archived from [the original](http://www.auburn.edu/~johnspm/gloss/market_economy) on 27 December 2012. Retrieved 28 December 2012. <a id="^ref-6"></a>^ref-6
7. Bock man, Johanna (2011). _Markets in the name of Socialism: The Left-Wing origins of Neoliberalism_. Stanford University Press. [ISBN](ISBN.md) [978-0804775663](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special:BookSources/978-0804775663).<!-- <sup>[_[page needed](Wikipedia:Citing%20sources.md)_]</sup> --> <a id="^ref-7"></a>^ref-7
8. ["Supply and Demand: Why Markets Tick"](https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/fandd/issues/Series/Back-to-Basics/Supply-and-Demand#:~:text=Supply%20is%20generally%20considered%20to,higher%20prices,%20consumers%20buy%20less.). _IMF_. Retrieved 2024-09-22. <a id="^ref-8"></a>^ref-8
